Kappa opioids modulate hedgehog signaling to attenuate 
osteoarthritis
Alexander E. Weber, MD1, Omid Jalali, BS1, Sean Limfat, BS1, Ruzanna Shkhyan, BS1, 
Robert Van Der Horst, BS1, Siyoung Lee, BS1, Yucheng Lin, MD1,3,4, Liangliang Li, MD1,3,5, 
Erik N. Mayer, BS1, Liming Wang, MD3,5, Nancy Q. Liu, MD1, Frank A. Petrigliano, MD1,2, 
Jay R. Lieberman, MD1,2, Denis Evseenko, MD, PhD1,2,*
1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of Southern 
California (USC), Los Angeles, CA, 90033, USA.
2Department of Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine, USC, Los Angeles, CA, 90033, 
USA.
3Digital Medicine Institute, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210000, China
4Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Zhongda Hospital, School of Medicine, Southeast 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, 210009, China
5Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nanjing First Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
Jiangsu, 210000, China
Abstract
Objective—Inhibition of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling prevents cartilage degeneration and promotes 
repair in animal models of osteoarthritis (OA). Current study was designed to explore if 
modulation of kappa opioid receptor (KOR) signaling may have therapeutic potential for achieving 
disease-modifying activity in OA models through Hh modulation.
Methods—Normal human primary tissues were obtained from the NDRI. Human OA samples 
were collected from patients with osteoarthritis undergoing total joint replacements. For in vivo 
studies, a partial medial meniscectomy (PMM) rat model was used. A novel automated 3D 
indentation tester (Mach-1) was used to quantify articular cartilage thickness and stiffness 
properties.
Results—We have demonstrated that activation of KOR by a selective peptide agonist JT09 
inhibits Hh signaling (p=0.002) in normal and osteoarthritic human articular chondrocytes via 
cAMP/CREB pathway. JT09 markedly decreased matrix degeneration in articular chondrocytes 
and cartilage explants induced by a Hh agonist, SAG (p=0.026). Moreover, in vivo application of 
*Correspondence to: Denis Evseenko MD, PhD. Vice Chair for Research, Associate Professor of Orthopaedic Surgery, Stem Cell 
Research and Regenerative Medicine. USC, Los Angeles, CA, 90033, USA. 1450 Biggy St., NRT4509, Los Angeles, CA 90033. 
evseenko@usc.edu.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: DE, JRL, AEW, and LW; Methodology: NQL, OJ; Investigation and data analysis: OJ, SL, RS, SL, RVH, YL, LL; 
Writing - Original Draft: OJ and SL; Writing - Review & Editing: OJ, SL, JRL, AEW, NQL, DE; Funding Acquisition: DE and AEW; 
Supervision: DE.
Conflict of Interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Arthritis Rheumatol. 2020 August ; 72(8): 1278–1288. doi:10.1002/art.41250.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
JT09 via intra-articular injection significantly (60% improvement, p=0.021 for the tibial plateau) 
attenuated articular cartilage degeneration after PMM. In JT09 treated rats, cartilage content, 
structure and functional properties were largely maintained, and osteophyte formation was reduced 
(by 70%, p=0.005).
Conclusion—Current study defines a novel mechanism for the role of the KOR in articular 
cartilage homeostasis and disease, providing a potential unifying mechanistic basis for the overlap 
in processes and pathologies shown to involve opioid and Hh signaling. Moreover, this study 
identifies a potential novel therapeutic strategy in which KOR modulation can improve outcomes 
in patients with arthritis.
Introduction
The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway is a highly conserved cell signaling pathway that 
plays a key function in normal embryonic development. During long bone ontogenesis, 
canonical Hh signaling pathways cause growth plate chondrocytes to proliferate and undergo 
hypertrophy before cellular apoptosis and subsequent mineralization to form bone. At the 
end of long bones, Hh-programmed mesenchymal cell differentiation and death specifies the 
location of the joint (1).
More recently, it has been discovered that the role of Hh in development is recapitulated in 
multiple skeletal and joint system repair and regenerative processes and that Hh 
dysregulation leads to the development of disease (2). In OA, articular chondrocytes undergo 
phenotypic and gene expression changes similar to that of hypertrophic growth plate 
chondrocytes in long bone formation. Reminiscent of its effects in embryogenesis, increased 
Hh signaling has been shown to drive these changes in articular chondrocytes in adult life, 
and inhibition of Hh signaling prevents cartilage degeneration and promotes repair in animal 
models of OA (3).
Joint development and homeostasis are dependent on multiple pathways. In our previous 
studies, we have shown that the kappa opioid receptor (KOR) is highly upregulated during 
human development (4). Consequently, we have examined genes that are enriched in human 
cartilage-committed mesenchymal cells (pre-chondrocytes). Unexpectedly, the gene 
encoding the KOR, OPRK1, showed the highest enrichment relative to other genes, 
including classic genes expressed in the articular cartilage lineage such as SOX9 and 
COL2A1 (5). We have also shown that KOR knockout mice suffer accelerated cartilage 
degeneration when compared to WT mice following injury (4). Conversely, in vitro 
activation of KOR signaling, previously thought to provide only pain relief (6), was shown 
by our group to have direct anabolic effects in cartilage cells. These preliminary studies laid 
the groundwork for establishing KOR signaling as a potential therapeutic target for not only 
pain relief, but also prevention of joint cartilage degeneration. However, the precise 
molecular mechanisms involved in KOR regulation of joint development and health remain 
largely unsolved, thus limiting conclusions regarding a potential role of the KOR in joint 
health and disease.
All opioid receptor subtypes, including the KOR, are structurally similar members of the 
GPCR superfamily, which activate either the Gαs or Gi subunits (7). We have previously 
Weber et al. Page 2
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
demonstrated that prolonged KOR activation promotes increases in the secondary 
messengers, cAMP and PKA, in articular chondrocytes, indicating upregulation of the Gαs 
subunit (4). As Hh expression has been shown to be directly inhibited by Gαs-PKA signaling 
(8), we hypothesized that opioid receptor signaling may function in joint development and 
homeostasis through modulation of Hh expression, and that opioid receptor signaling may 
have therapeutic potential for achieving disease-modifying activity through Hh modulation.
Methods
For all experiments, biological replicates (cells from independent specimens) were 
employed to generate data. For experiments expected to yield large differences, standard 
practice of using 3–5 replicates was followed.
Isolation and culture of primary human and porcine cartilage tissue
Only early passages of chondrocytes (passage 0–2) were used for experimentation to avoid 
de-differentiation and loss of cartilage phenotype (9). Normal human male and female adult 
articular cartilage and synovium (n=6, 20 to 60 years old) were obtained from the National 
Disease Research Interchange (NDRI). Human OA samples were obtained from NDRI and 
Dr. Jay Lieberman (protocol HS-16–00449 approved by the USC IRB Committee). These 
OA samples were dissected from the tibial and femoral articular cartilage. All patients had 
3–4 on the Kellgren–Lawrence grading scale for OA. Three male (60, 67 and 79 years old) 
and three female (55 and 70 and 81 years old) specimens were used for experimentation. All 
donated material was anonymous and carried no personal identifiers. Samples were 
processed following previously established protocols (5). Legs from five-month-old Yucatan 
minipigs were obtained from S&S Farms (Ramona, California), and cartilage was harvested 
and digested following previously established protocols. Cartilage explants were harvested 
using 2 mm punch biopsies (Miltex, Inc., York, PA), and the wet weight of each explant 
determined prior to experimentation. For cell isolation cartilage tissue was digested as 
described previously (10, 11).
Cell culture reagents were purchased from Life Technologies, Inc. (Grand Island, New 
York). JT09 drug was a gift from Dr Thomas A. Dix from Department of Drug Discovery 
and Biomedical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC. Smoothened Agonist (SAG) and PKA inhibitor (H89 hydrochloride) were 
purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Human and pig chondrocytes were cultured 
in DMEM F12 medium containing 10% (vol/vol) fetal bovine serum and 1% Penicillin-
Streptomycin (vol/vol) at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO2.
Western Blot analysis
Treated and non-treated articular chondrocytes were dissolved in RIPA Lysis and Extraction 
Buffer (Pierce, Rockford, IL) containing protease inhibitors (Pierce) followed by sonication 
with a 15-second pulse at a power output of 2 using the VirSonic 100 (SP Industries 
Company, Warminster, PA). Protein concentrations were determined by BCA protein assay 
(Pierce) and boiled for 5 minutes with Laemmli Sample Buffer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), 
Proteins were separated on acrylamide gel and analyzed by Western blot using antibodies 
Weber et al. Page 3
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
purchased from Cell Signaling, anti-GLI1 (Cat #2534) and pCREB (Cat #9198) primary 
antibodies. Histone 3 (Cat #9715) antibody was used as loading control. Proteins were 
resolved with SDS-PAGE utilizing 4–15% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Gels and 
transferred to Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer Packs with a 0.2-μm pore-size nitrocellulose 
membrane. The SDS-PAGE running buffer, 4–15% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Gels, 
Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer Packs with a 0.2-μm pore-size nitrocellulose membrane were 
purchased from Biorad (Hercules, CA). Nitrocellulose membranes were blocked in 5% 
nonfat milk in 0.05% (v/v) Tween 20 (PBST) (Corning, Manassas, V A). Membranes were 
then incubated with primary antibodies overnight. After washing in PBS containing 0.05% 
(v/v) Tween 20 (PBST), membranes were incubated with secondary antibodies (Thermo 
Scientific, Rockford, IL). After washing, development was performed with the Clarity 
Western ECL Blotting Substrate (Biorad, Hercules, CA) and images were quantified by 
ImageJ software.
Quantitative Real-Time PCR
Power SYBR Green (Applied Biosystems) RT-PCR amplification and detection was 
performed using an Applied Biosystems Step One Plus Real-Time PCR machine. The 
comparative Ct method for relative quantification (2-ΔΔCt) was used to quantitate gene 
expression. TBP (TATA-box binding protein) was used for gene normalization and 
expressed relative to a calibrator (sample in each set with lowest expression). Primer 
sequences are provided in Supplementary Table 1.
Experimental Animal Model and Surgical Procedures
All animal experiments were accomplished in accordance with the National Institutes of 
Health Guidelines for the Care and Use of Laboratory animals, and were approved by the 
institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at University of Southern 
California. Sixteen male Sprague-Dawley Rats (12 weeks old; Jackson Labs) were used in 
the experimental phase of this study. Rats were housed (2 per cage) in a regulated 
environment (temperature, 20–22oC; humidity, 50 ± 5%; night/day cycle, 12 hours) with 
freedom to move about the cage and access to food and water. Each rat was randomized to 
treatment with JT09 (n=7), saline (n=6), or sham (n=3) (Supplementary Figure 1). To ensure 
proper treatment allocation, rats were tagged for identification based on their treatment 
assignments.
Anesthesia was induced and maintained with 2.5% isoflurane. Following anesthetic 
induction, all rats were subjected to unilateral partial medial meniscectomy (PMM) surgery 
on the right knee joint (12). Briefly, each rat was surgically prepped and draped in a sterile 
fashion. A 1 cm incision was then made from the distal patella to the proximal tibia to 
expose the patellar tendon. Then the joint cavity was opened through the standard medial 
parapatellar approach. An ophthalmic surgical blade was used to incise the medical 
meniscotibial ligament. The meniscus was separated from the tibial plateau and then ~50% 
of it was excised.
Weber et al. Page 4
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Weekly Injections, Joint Harvesting, and Microscopic Analysis
At weekly intervals following the PMM surgery and initial injection, rats received intra-
articular injection of their assigned treatment to the operated knee (Supplementary Figure 1). 
Following induction of anesthesia, the patella and tibial tuberosity were palpated on the right 
knee. Once the location of the patellar tendon was determined, a needle syringe was inserted 
lateral to the tendon. Once insertion through the knee capsule was felt, intra-articular 
placement was confirmed by cycling the knee through flexion and extension to estimate the 
position of the needle in respect to the patella and other knee landmarks. 100 μl of the 
assigned treatment was then injected, and rats were observed for safe return to consciousness 
and normal activity. Six weeks after the initial surgery, rats were sacrificed.
Prior to fixation and decalcification, all rat femurs and tibias were separated for micro 
indentation testing. Femurs and tibias had to be separated to meet the requirements for 
testing with the Mach-1 microindenter.
Microindentation Testing
For microindentation testing, a novel automated 3D indentation mapping mechanical tester 
was used (Mach-1, Biomomentum) (13). Once harvested, a cyanoacrylate adhesive was used 
to glue samples to the testing chambers, with care taken to ensure that the articular cartilage 
of the femoral condyle or tibial plateau was facing up in the direction of the indenter 
(Supplementary Figures 2 and 3). Proper load cell calibration was then ensured for each 
sample, and a mapping toolbox software was used to photograph samples and outline the 
surface of the articular cartilage. With boundaries delineated for the medial and lateral 
compartments, a position grid was overlaid on each sub-surface (Supplementary Figure 2). 
Following biomechanical measurements, the spherical probe indenter was replaced by a 
needle indenter which measures load as it descends first through air, then pierces the 
articular cartilage, and lastly pierces through the surface of subchondral bone 
(Supplementary Figure 3). The desired positions for biomechanical or thickness testing were 
then manually selected. Around 20 positions on each sub-surface were designated, with 
small variation in position number and placement based primarily on the size of the sample. 
Additionally, one reference point was selected for each sub-surface. The testing chamber 
was then filled with PBS solution to cover the highest point of the sample by at least 1 cm, 
and 15 minutes were allowed to pass for equilibration. The indenter was then lowered to 2 
mm above the sample surface, and positioned directly above the reference point for a given 
sub-surface. The metric coordinates for each reference point was determined, and 
subsequent measurements of stiffness and thickness were positionally identified on the 
articular cartilage surface based on their relation to these reference points. To ensure proper 
determination of the biomechanical properties of the cartilage surface, the spherical probe 
was used first to measure structural stiffness, prior to the use of a needle probe (which had 
the potential to alter surface properties after needle penetration) to measure cartilage 
thickness. Batch analysis software was used to collect all relevant data points following 
completion of microindentation. A mixed-effects model analysis with Tukey’s post hoc for 
multiple comparisons was conducted to evaluate the differences in articular cartilage 
thickness and stiffness across different regions using data points collected from multiple 
Weber et al. Page 5
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
animals (13). Additional detailed information on biomechanical testing is provided in the 
Supplementary Methods section.
Histology and immunohistochemistry
Rat tissues were fixed in 10% formalin for 48 hours, dehydrated with ethanol, and embedded 
in paraffin using routine procedures. A microtome (Leica) was used to cut 5-μm sections. 
Slides were then deparaffinized and stained for sulfated GAG with Fast Green/Safranin O. 
Slides were also stained with antibodies pCREB (Cell Signaling, Cat# 2534), GLI1 (Cell 
Signaling, Cat# 9198), ADAMTS4 (Bioss USA, Cat# bs-1459R), ADAMTS5 (Bioss USA, 
Cat# bs-3573R), MMP13 (Abgent, Cat# 13706C), COL10 (Abcam, Cat# ab58632) and 
Kappa Opioid Receptor (GeneTex, Cat# GTX78005). H&E staining was performed to assess 
morphology.
Histological, Osteophyte Production, and Immunohistochemical Analysis
Medial femoral condyles sections were taken from the medial tibial plateau in sagittal slices 
at a thickness of 5 microns using a microtome (Leica). Tissue sections from each sample 
were stained with Safranin O and Fast Green for assessment of proteoglycan distribution and 
osteophyte production respectively. Samples were then blinded for treatment status and 
graded according to the Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) scoring 
system guidelines (14). Qualitative assessment of cartilage cap continuity and presence of 
subchondral bone fibrosis and cystic formation were also assessed microscopically.
Neoepitope analysis
Pig articular cartilage explants were cultured with SAG (3 nM), JT09 (10 μM) or both and 
then digested for 2 hr at 37°C with 0.01 units chondroitinase ABC (Sigma Aldrich, St. 
Louis, MO). Samples were then dialyzed with ultrapure water for 24 hr at 4°C, freeze dried, 
dissolved in RIPA Lysis and Extraction Buffer (Pierce, IL) containing protease inhibitors 
(Pierce) followed by sonication. Proteins were separated and analyzed by Western blot using 
primary antibodies against aggrecan (Novus Biologicals, Cat# NB100–74350) and collagen 
neoepitopes (Ibex, Cat #50–1035). Wet weight of explants was used as loading control.
Statistical analysis
Numbers of repeats for each experiment are indicated in the figure legends. Pooled data are 
represented as mean ± SD unless otherwise indicated. Unless otherwise indicated, statistical 
analysis was performed using one-way ANOV A followed by the Tukey test to compare more 
than 2 groups or 2-tailed Student’s t test to compare 2 groups. p values less than 0.05 were 
considered to be significant.
Results
JT09 Modulates the Expression of Hedgehog Signaling in Both Healthy and OA 
Chondrocytes
Our studies have shown that KOR is expressed in developing human chondrocytes (4). To 
further validate these findings, we examined if this opioid receptor is expressed in adult rat 
Weber et al. Page 6
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
and human articular chondrocytes. Immunohistochemical analysis has shown that a vast 
majority of articular chondrocytes are highly positive for KOR (Figure 1A). The OPRK1 
gene was highly expressed in human adult healthy chondrocytes, with no significant 
differences in the expression levels observed between normal and OA articular chondrocytes 
(Figure 1B).
Previous studies have shown that inhibition of Hh signaling reduces severity of OA (3, 15). 
It has also been shown by our group that KOR signaling through cAMP/CREB can impact 
OA pathogenesis and disease outcomes (4, 5). To determine if Hh and KOR signaling 
interact to regulate chondrocytes and disease progression, we examined the effects of KOR 
signaling on the downstream Hh target, GLI1, using a selective KOR agonist, JT09. JT09 is 
a peptide compound shown in animal models to provide similar pain relief to morphine, but 
with significantly reduced central availability and addictive potential (6). We first treated 
healthy pig articular chondrocytes with JT09 for 24 hours at concentrations of 100 nM, 300 
nM, 1 μM and 3 μM, and measured phosphorylated CREB (pCREB) levels as an indication 
of PKA activity and GLI1 levels as an indication of Hh activity (Figure 2A). Increasing 
concentration of JT09 increased pCREB while simultaneously decreasing GLI1 levels in a 
dose-dependent fashion. Effects of JT09 plateaued at 300 nM, and this concentration was 
selected for subsequent in vivo studies while remaining in vitro experiments were conducted 
using a concentration of 10 μM.
We have previously shown that KOR null mice show accelerated articular cartilage 
degeneration following injury relative to WT animals (4). We therefore sought to determine 
if Hh signaling inhibition through KOR activation could be achieved in human OA 
chondrocytes. We found that human OA chondrocytes compared to healthy chondrocytes 
displayed significant decreases and increases in pCREB and GLI1 expression, respectively 
(Figure 2B), in agreement with previous findings (15). This profile in OA chondrocytes was 
then abrogated by a 24-hour treatment with JT09, suggesting that JT09 can reduce Hh 
signaling in OA chondrocytes via increases in intracellular cAMP. Cyclic AMP has been 
shown to modulate PKA, and PKA activation directly phosphorylates GLI, which represses 
Hh target gene expression (16, 17). To confirm that JT09 activation of KOR operates 
through cAMP/CREB to modulate GLI1 expression, we treated pig chondrocytes with a 
PKA inhibitor, H89 (100 nM, 24 hours), and found that H89 inhibition of PKA/CREB 
signaling leads to an increase in GLI1 while JT09 decreases GLI1 (Figure 2C). Articular 
chondrocytes obtained from male and female donors with OA showed similar responses to 
JT09 treatment (Figure 2B and Supplementary Figure 4).
In previous work with KOR null mice, we found that the null phenotype increased 
susceptibility to joint damage and more severe cartilage degeneration (4). This suggests that 
KOR activation regulates Hh signaling following injury, and that this is recapitulated in vivo. 
RT-PCR of human OA chondrocytes with JT09 resulted in a significant decrease in the 
expression of catabolic genes MMP13 and ADAMTS5, suggesting that KOR modulation of 
Hh signaling has the propensity to decrease cartilage matrix degradation in the disease 
progression (Figure 2D). In all, we show that Hh signaling in human OA is upregulated, and 
that a KOR agonist, JT09, increases pCREB while decreasing GLI1 signaling in the same 
cells in alignment with our hypothesis. Taken together, these results suggest that activation 
Weber et al. Page 7
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
of non-canonical KOR signaling through cAMP/CREB can inhibit the downstream Hh 
target, GLI1, in healthy and OA chondrocytes to promote cartilage protection and repair, and 
improve disease outcomes.
SAG induces degenerative changes in cartilage cells and matrix that can be directly 
inhibited by JT09
In order to demonstrate that inhibition of Hh signaling is essential for downstream cartilage 
protective effects, we have utilized a commonly used activator of Hh signaling, Smoothened 
Agonist (SAG). This synthetic small molecule is a chlorobenzothiophene-containing 
compound that acts as an activator of the G protein-coupled receptor Smoothened (18). Smo 
blockage could be therapeutic in reducing osteoarthritic severity caused by articular cartilage 
degeneration(19). Cartilage degenerating proteases in articular cartilage such as matrix 
metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13) and a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with 
thrombospondin motifs 5 (ADAMTS5) are responsible for the degradation of the major 
components of this tissue, collagen and aggrecan, respectively. Treatment of pig articular 
chondrocytes with JT09 ameliorated SAG-induced transcription of MMP13 and ADAMTS5 
(Figure 3A). To measure direct collagenase and aggrecanase activity in the matrix, we 
performed a neo-epitope assay which shows the amount of cleaved collagen and aggrecan 
neo-epitopes in the supernatant. Treatment with SAG dramatically increased collagenase and 
aggrecanase activity, and addition of JT09 to SAG-treated explants significantly reduced 
cartilage degradation (Figure 3B). This indicated that JT09 was able to reverse the effects of 
SAG, suggesting that Hh inhibition is crucial for prevention of extracellular matrix 
degeneration.
JT09 Prevents the Progression of Cartilage Damage in Vivo
Since these results suggested that JT09 can inhibit Hh signaling in articular chondrocytes, 
we next sought to determine if application of JT09 could prevent chondrocyte hypertrophy 
and cartilage matrix degeneration in vivo, a mechanism known to be a key driver of OA (15). 
To evaluate the cartilage protective effects of JT09, we performed a partial medial 
meniscectomy (PMM) model of rat knee OA and administered intra-articular injection of 
saline or 300 nM JT09 in the operative knee at the time of surgery and weekly thereafter for 
six weeks (Supplementary Figure 1). Osteoarthritis research society international (OARSI) 
histological scoring and osteophyte size and maturity analysis of Safranin O stained sections 
indicated dramatic cartilage loss, surface disruption, and osteophyte generation in vehicle rat 
femur and tibia. In JT09 treated rats, cartilage content and structure were largely maintained, 
and osteophyte formation was greatly reduced (Figure 4A).
During cartilage degeneration, cells undergo apoptosis, promoting matrix loss via MMPs 
and aggrecanases leading to structural changes. It has been previously shown that 
upregulation of Hh signaling increases activation of its transcriptional regulator, GLI1, 
which leads to dramatically increased expression of genes whose protein products mediate 
cartilage extracellular matrix destruction including ADAMTS4, ADAMTS5, and MMP13, 
and markers of chondrocyte hypertrophy like COL10 (15). We next examined the articular 
cartilage expression of these OA markers in control and JT09-treated rats. IHC revealed 
dramatically reduced expression of GLI1, ADAMTS4, ADAMTS5, MMP13, and COL10 in 
Weber et al. Page 8
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
rats treated with JT09 (Figure 4B), in agreement with previous findings demonstrating the 
reduction of these markers in cartilage by at least half with Hh signaling inhibition (through 
genetic ablation or pharmacologic agents) (15). In conjunction with our mechanistic results, 
these data suggest that intra-articular application of a selective KOR agonist, JT09, prevents 
cartilage matrix degeneration and chondrocyte hypertrophy in vivo and, at least partially, this 
mechanism is likely to be mediated through modulation of Hh signaling. Histological 
assessment of synovial membrane showed minimal differences between groups; a more 
prominent mononucleated infiltration in the control group potentially indicating a persistent 
inflammatory reaction as a result of degenerative changes in articular cartilage 
(Supplementary Figure 5).
JT09 Improves Articular Cartilage Functional Compressive and Structural Properties
In addition to conventional scoring of cartilage quality, we also used a novel bio-indentation 
scanner (Mach-1) to determine the biomechanical effect of JT09 on rat knee functional joint 
health and articular cartilage structural phenotypes across the entire articular surface 
(Supplementary Figure 2A). Treatment with JT09 significantly improved the mechanical 
properties of the medial femoral condyle (MFC) and the medial tibial plateau (MTP) when 
compared to vehicle rats (Figure 5). In particular, qualitative and quantitative results 
demonstrate that vehicle rats suffered the greatest reduction in mechanical properties in the 
middle third of the MFC and MTP, in agreement with previous studies demonstrating the 
greatest risk of cartilage damage in this region following PMM (20) (Supplementary Figure 
2B). In contrast, JT09-treated rats demonstrated equivalent mechanical properties in all 
regions of the MFC and MTP when compared to sham rats, suggesting that treatment with 
JT09 prevented functional compressive tissue degeneration following PMM (Figure 5).
Vehicle rats demonstrated significant tissue loss and thinning of the articular cartilage 
surface in the middle third of the MTP and MFC (Figure 5A–D). In the outer and inner 
thirds, vehicle rats had significantly higher cartilage thickness with substantial variation, 
suggesting degeneration at different stage. Treatment with JT09 resulted in a grossly smooth 
and uninterrupted articular surface. Corresponding thickness values demonstrated much less 
variation, with no significant tissue loss or cartilage thinning evident in the high-risk middle 
third of the MTP and MFC (Figure 5A,B) compared to sham rats. In agreement with the 
improved cartilage content, structure, and biochemical profile seen on microscopic analysis, 
these results indicate that treatment with JT09 prevents degenerative changes to the 
structural phenotype of the articular surface following PMM.
Discussion
The current study defines a novel molecular mechanism for the role of the KOR in articular 
cartilage homeostasis and disease, providing a potential unifying mechanistic basis for the 
overlap in processes and pathologies shown to involve opioid and Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. 
Moreover, this study identifies a potential novel therapeutic strategy in which KOR 
modulation in cartilage and/or synovial tissue can improve outcomes in patients with 
arthritis.
Weber et al. Page 9
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
However, this study did include some limitations. For the in vivo OA model, the rat sample 
size was relatively small and they might have not been completely skeletally mature as they 
were only 12 weeks old. In addition to age, all animals analyzed were males, and gender was 
not addressed as a biological variable. Although our mechanistic in vitro studies clearly 
established an inhibitory effect of KOR agonists on Hh signaling known to be implicated in 
the pathogenesis of OA, it cannot be definitively claimed that chondroprotective effects of 
JT09 in vivo is exclusively Hh dependent. More studies are needed to determine the 
therapeutic potential of KOR agonists in human OA.
As a single morphogen, Hh induces different responses depending on the cell type, Hh 
signaling dose and time of exposure received by a responding cell (21). This is believed to 
be the means for the wide breadth of normal, pathologic, and repair/regenerative processes 
shown to involve Hh signaling (21). Previous studies (22) have indicated that opioids such as 
morphine may upregulate KOR gene expression; and clinical observation demonstrates 
losses in bone mineral density and increases in risks of fracture and osteoporosis with 
chronic prescription opioid use. However, a direct mechanistic link between Hh and opioid 
signaling has never before been previously made.
For the first time, we have clearly demonstrated the role of opioid receptor activation in 
modulating Hh signaling, providing a unifying mechanistic basis for the overlap in processes 
and pathologies shown to involve opioid and Hh signaling. Our results provide a molecular 
mechanism for the growing body of literature demonstrating the non-pain related peripheral 
function of the KOR for arthritis prevention (4, 23). However, the therapeutic potential of 
these findings goes far beyond that, which is demonstrated here in chondrocytes. Modulation 
of Hh signaling has been identified as a therapeutic target for enhancing regeneration and 
repair of damaged cartilage tissue. Further, modulation of Hh signaling has important 
implications for maintenance of skeletal health beyond the joint, including in bone 
mineralization and bone mass regulation (24). Of significance, the oral peripheral KOR 
peptide agonist KORSUV A/CR845 is in late-stage FDA clinical trials for its application in 
providing less addictive pain relief, facilitating the direct translation of these and future 
findings to repurposed human application. Given the current lack of available treatments for 
OA and cartilage damage, our findings identify new therapeutic possibilities for KOR 
agonists. In all, the present study opens up a novel mechanism for the use of opioid signaling 
to maintain skeletal and joint health and treat conditions in which modulation of Hh 
signaling can be therapeutically beneficial.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Thomas A. Dix from Department of Drug Discovery and Biomedical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, 
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425-2303 for providing JT09 drug. This work is supported 
by NIH grants R01AR071734 and R01AG058624, and also by Department of Defense grant W81XWH-13-1-0465, 
(all to DE).
Weber et al. Page 10
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
References
1. Kobayashi T, Soegiarto DW, Yang Y , Lanske B, Schipani E, McMahon AP, et al. Indian hedgehog 
stimulates periarticular chondrocyte differentiation to regulate growth plate length independently of 
PTHrP. J Clin Invest. 2005;115(7):1734–42. [PubMed: 15951842] 
2. Alman BA. The role of hedgehog signalling in skeletal health and disease. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 
2015;11(9):552–60. [PubMed: 26077918] 
3. Ruiz-Heiland G, Horn A, Zerr P, Hofstetter W, Baum W, Stock M, et al. Blockade of the hedgehog 
pathway inhibits osteophyte formation in arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012;71(3):400–7. [PubMed: 
22233602] 
4. Wu L, Zhang S, Shkhyan R, Lee S, Gullo F, Eliasberg CD, et al. Kappa opioid receptor signaling 
protects cartilage tissue against posttraumatic degeneration. JCI Insight. 2017;2(1):e88553. 
[PubMed: 28097228] 
5. Wu L, Bluguermann C, Kyupelyan L, Latour B, Gonzalez S, Shah S, et al. Human developmental 
chondrogenesis as a basis for engineering chondrocytes from pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cell 
Reports. 2013;1(6):575–89. [PubMed: 24371811] 
6. Beck TC, Reichel CM, Helke KL, Bhadsavle SS, and Dix TA. Non-addictive orally-active kappa 
opioid agonists for the treatment of peripheral pain in rats. Eur J Pharmacol. 2019.
7. Spetea M Opioid receptors and their ligands in the musculoskeletal system and relevance for pain 
control. Curr Pharm Des. 2013;19(42):7382–90. [PubMed: 23448480] 
8. Jin Y , Cong Q, Gvozdenovic-Jeremic J, Hu J, Zhang Y , Terkeltaub R, et al. inhibits ectopic joint 
calcification and maintains articular chondrocytes by repressing hedgehog signaling. Development. 
2018;145(18).
9. Wu L, Gonzalez S, Shah S, Kyupelyan L, Petrigliano FA, McAllister DR, et al. Extracellular matrix 
domain formation as an indicator of chondrocyte dedifferentiation and hypertrophy. Tissue Eng Part 
C Methods. 2014;20(2):160–8. [PubMed: 23758619] 
10. Shkhyan R, Van Handel B, Bogdanov J, Lee S, Yu Y , Scheinberg M, et al. Drug-induced 
modulation of gp130 signalling prevents articular cartilage degeneration and promotes repair. Ann 
Rheum Dis. 2018;77(5):760–9. [PubMed: 29436471] 
11. Ferguson GB, Van Handel B, Bay M, Fiziev P, Org T, Lee S, et al. Mapping molecular landmarks 
of human skeletal ontogeny and pluripotent stem cell-derived articular chondrocytes. Nat 
Commun. 2018;9(1):3634. [PubMed: 30194383] 
12. Lozoya KA, and Flores JB. A novel rat osteoarthrosis model to assess apoptosis and matrix 
degradation. Pathol Res Pract. 2000;196(11):729–45. [PubMed: 11186168] 
13. Sim S, Chevrier A, Garon M, Quenneville E, Lavigne P, Yaroshinsky A, et al. Electromechanical 
probe and automated indentation maps are sensitive techniques in assessing early degenerated 
human articular cartilage. J Orthop Res. 2017;35(4):858–67. [PubMed: 27279435] 
14. Gerwin N, Bendele AM, Glasson S, and Carlson CS. The OARSI histopathology initiative - 
recommendations for histological assessments of osteoarthritis in the rat. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 
2010;18 Suppl 3:S24–34.
15. Lin AC, Seeto BL, Bartoszko JM, Khoury MA, Whetstone H, Ho L, et al. Modulating hedgehog 
signaling can attenuate the severity of osteoarthritis. Nat Med. 2009;15(12):1421–5. [PubMed: 
19915594] 
16. Jin Y , Cong Q, Gvozdenovic-Jeremic J, Hu J, Zhang Y , Terkeltaub R, et al. Enpp1 inhibits ectopic 
joint calcification and maintains articular chondrocytes by repressing hedgehog signaling. 
Development. 2018;145(18).
17. Niewiadomski P, Kong JH, Ahrends R, Ma Y , Humke EW, Khan S, et al. Gli protein activity is 
controlled by multisite phosphorylation in vertebrate Hedgehog signaling. Cell Rep. 
2014;6(1):168–81. [PubMed: 24373970] 
18. Chen JK, Taipale J, Young KE, Maiti T, and Beachy PA. Small molecule modulation of 
Smoothened activity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002;99(22):14071–6. [PubMed: 12391318] 
19. Lin AC, Seeto BL, Bartoszko JM, Khoury MA, Whetstone H, Ho L, et al. Modulating hedgehog 
signaling can attenuate the severity of osteoarthritis. Nat Med. 2009;15(12):1421–5. [PubMed: 
19915594] 
Weber et al. Page 11
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
20. Iijima H, Aoyama T, Ito A, Tajino J, Nagai M, Zhang X, et al. Destabilization of the medial 
meniscus leads to subchondral bone defects and site-specific cartilage degeneration in an 
experimental rat model. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2014;22(7):1036–43. [PubMed: 24857975] 
21. Varjosalo M, and Taipale J. Hedgehog: functions and mechanisms. Genes Dev. 2008;22(18):2454–
72. [PubMed: 18794343] 
22. Suzuki S, Chuang TK, Chuang LF, Doi RH, and Chuang RY . Morphine up regulates kappa-opioid 
receptors of human lymphocytes. Neuroimmune Circuits, Drugs of Abuse, and Infectious 
Diseases, Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology. 2001;493:81–7.
23. Bileviciute-Ljungar I, Saxne T, and Spetea M. Anti-inflammatory effects of contralateral 
administration of the kappa-opioid agonist U-50,488H in rats with unilaterally induced adjuvant 
arthritis. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2006;45(3):295–302. [PubMed: 16249243] 
24. Ohba S, Kawaguchi H, Kugimiya F, Ogasawara T, Kawamura N, Saito T, et al. Patched1 
haploinsufficiency increases adult bone mass and modulates Gli3 repressor activity. Dev Cell. 
2008;14(5):689–99. [PubMed: 18477452] 
Weber et al. Page 12
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Fig 1. Expression of KOR and OPRK1 in rat and human cartilage, respectively.
(A) Kappa opioid receptor cross-sectional staining of the articular surface of a 3-month-old 
rat OA cartilage. Representative images (n=3). Scale bar: 100 μm. All images taken at 10x 
magnification. (B) OPRK1 gene (encodes KOR) expression in human healthy and OA 
cartilage (n=6). P-value calculated using one-way ANOV A with Student’s t test.
Weber et al. Page 13
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 2. Kappa opioid receptor (KOR) signaling is linked to the Hedgehog pathway in articular 
chondrocytes both in vivo and in vitro (A-C).
(A) Western blot (WB) evaluation of GLI1 and pCREB. Dose dependent assay of selective 
KOR agonist JT09 in pig chondrocytes for 24 hours with WB quantification of pCREB and 
GLI1. (B) Evaluation of pCREB and GLI1 levels in human normal, OA, and OA treated 
with JT09 (10μM) chondrocytes. (C) Pig articular chondrocytes treated with JT09 (10uM) 
and PKA inhibitor (H89 hydrochloride 400nM). (D) Quantitative PCR (qPCR) of MMP13 
and ADAMTS5 in OA human chondrocytes treated with JT09 (10 μM) for 24 hours. qPCR 
run using technical triplicates with three biological replicates. All blots are representative 
images (n=3). Graphs indicate Mean ± SD. P-values calculated using one-way ANOV A with 
post hoc Tukey test (B) or Student’s t test (D).
Weber et al. Page 14
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 3. Hedgehog agonist SAG induces degenerative changes in cartilage cells and matrix that 
can be directly inhibited by an opioid agonist JT09.
(A) Transcription of catabolic genes was determined via qPCR in adult healthy pig articular 
chondrocytes treated with SAG (3 nM), JT09 (10 μM), or both. qPCR run using technical 
triplicates with three biological replicates. Data are represented at Mean ± SD. (B) Adult pig 
articular cartilage explants were incubated with SAG, JT09, or both; levels of cleaved 
aggrecan and collagen epitopes in the supernatant are normalized to the wet weight of the 
explant. For all panels, data from three biological replicates are shown. Data are represented 
at Mean ± SD. P-values calculated using one-way ANOV A with post hoc Tukey test.
Weber et al. Page 15
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 4. Selective KOR agonist JT09 attenuates cartilage degeneration in a rat model of 
posttraumatic osteoarthritis.
(A, B) 3 sham and 13 PMM rat joints 6 weeks after initial surgery. PMM rats received 
weekly intra-articular injections of saline or JT09 (300 nM). (A) Cross sectional Safranin O 
and Fast Green staining of tibia plateau and femoral condyle. Blinded OARSI scoring 
results, and measurement of osteophyte size and maturity for sham, vehicle, and JT09 
treated animals. Mean ± SD (n=3, 6, and 7, respectively). P-values calculated using one-way 
ANOV A with post hoc Tukey test. Scale bar: 500 μm. (B) GLI1, ADAMTS4, ADAMTS5, 
MMP13, and COL10 cross-sectional staining of the articular surface. Representative images 
(n=6, 7). Scale bar: 100 μm. (A, B) All images taken at 10x magnification.
Weber et al. Page 16
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Figure 5. JT09 improves biomechanical parameters in rats after posttraumatic joint injury.
(A, B) Femoral condyle (A) and tibial plateau (B) of rats treated with saline or JT09 (300 
nM). Lateral (left) and medial (right) condyle of tibia plateau. Gross morphology (first row), 
thickness (second row) and instantaneous modulus (third row) with heat map overlays. (C-
F) Thickness (C, D) and stiffness (E, F) quantification by MACH-1 indentation for sham, 
control, and JT09 treated animals. 5–6 data points were collected per region. Mean ± SD. P-
values calculated using mixed-effects model analysis with post hoc Tukey test. 
Representative images (n=3, 6, 7).
Weber et al. Page 17
Arthritis Rheumatol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2021 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript