Vol. 23, No. 8
Printed in U.S.A.
Send reprint requests to: Dr. Curtis D. Klaassen, Department of Pharmacol-
ogy,Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, KS 66160-7417.
840
0090-9556/95/2308-0840$02.00/0
DRUG MrmaousM AND DlsposmoN
Copyright C 1995 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics
IN VIVO MODIFICATION OF 3’-PHOSPHOADENOSINE 5’-PHOSPHOSULFATE AND
SULFATE BY INFUSION OF SODIUM SULFATE, CYSTEINE, AND METHIONINE
HYO J. KIM,1 CHERUKURY MADHU,2 JOON H. CHO,3 AND CURTIS D. KLAASSEN
Center on Environmental and Occupational Health, Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center
(Received January 1 0, 1 995; accepted May 1 1 , 1995)
ABSTRACT:
The Importance of tissue sulfate concentrations in regulating 3’-
phosphoadenosine 5’-phosphosulfate (PAPS) synthesis is not
known. Therefore, this study was conducted to determine the
influence of increased availabilfty of inorganic sulfate on steady-
state PAPS concentrations in various tissues. To increase tissue
sulfate concentrations, 2-1 6 mmol/kg of sodium sulfate and sulfur-
containing amino acids (cysteine or methionine) were infused in-
travenously for 2 hr Into pentobarbltal-anesthetlzed rats. Serial
blood samples were taken during the infusion and analyzed for
sulfate concentrations. After 2 hr of Infusion, liver, kidney, and
brain were removed for quantification of tissue PAPS and sulfate
concentrations. Infusion of sodium sulfate, cysteine, and methio-
nine increased serum and tissue sulfate concentrations In a dose-
and time-dependent manner. Serum sulfate concentrations in-
creased from 0.8 to 14 mM during the Infusion of sodium sulfate,
whereas infusions of cysteine and methlonlne Increased serum
sulfate concentrations to 4.8 and 2.0 mM, respectively. Tissue
sulfate concentrations also Increased during sulfate infusion. Uver
sulfate concentration increased from 0.8 to 4.8 mM, kidney con-
centration increased from 0.6 to 31 mM, and brain concentration
increased from 0.1 to 0.6 mM. Similar to the serum sulfate concen-
trations, sulfate infusion was the most effective in increasing tis-
sue sulfate concentrations, cysteine was intermediate, and methi-
onine the least effective. Although sulfate concentrations in liver,
kidney, and brain increased 6-, 50-, and 6-fold by infusing sulfate,
respectively’, tissue PAPS levels were not altered markedly. He-
patic PAPS concentrations increased significantly (30-35%) only
when infused with the higher doses (8 or 16 mmoVkg/2 hr) of
sodium sulfate. PAPS concentrations in kidney and brain were not
influenced by the increase in tissue sulfate concentrations. In sum-
mary, Infusions of sodium sulfate, cysteine, and methionine en-
hanced dramatically sulfate concentrations In serum, liver, kidney,
and brain, but had minimal effect on tissue PAPS concentrations.
Therefore, It seems that steady-state PAPS concentrations in tis-
sues are not readily modified by the enhancement of tissue sulfate
concentrations.
PAPS4 is synthesized from one molecule of inorganic sulfate and
two molecules of Al? in sequential reactions catalyzed by Al?
sulfurylase and APS kinase (1, 2). We have demonstrated previously
that hepatic PAPS levels decrease during the sulfation of xenobiotics,
which seems to be caused by the limited availability of the precursor,
inorganic sulfate (3). However, we also observed that steady-state
PAPS concentrations are maintained in liver and kidneys of rats
placed on a sulfur-deficient diet that reduces tissue sulfate concentra-
tions (4).
Whereas considerable data exist on the sulfate conjugation reaction
itself, there is little information available on the in vivo regulation of
PAPS levels in various tissues, which seems to be an important factor
in the sulfation of xenobiotics. Thus, the primary objective of the
present study was to determine whether an increase in inorganic
sulfate would increase the steady-state concentration of PAPS in
various tissues.
1 Present address: National Institute of Safety Research, Seoul, Korea.
2 Present address: Allergan Company, Irvine, CA.
3 Present address: Veterinary Research Institute, Anyang, Korea.
4 Abbreviations used are: PAPS, 3’-phosphoadenosine 5’-phosphosulfate;
ATP, adenosine triphosphate; APS, adenosine phosphosulfate.
This study was supported by U.S. Public Health Service Grant ES-03192.
The sulfate pool in tissues is derived from several intracellular
processes, including: 1) uptake of sulfate from the blood, 2) liberation
of sulfate by sulfatase activity, 3) lysosomal degradation of sulfated
macromolecules, and 4) oxidation of sulfur-containing precursors to
sulfate (5). Cysteine and methionine are considered to be the main
sources of inorganic sulfate in mammals (6). The metabolic pathways
of inorganic sulfate from cysteine and methionine are illustrated in fig.
1. Methionine can be metabolized to cysteine by trans-sulfuration.
Cysteine, in turn, can be converted into inorganic sulfate. Although it
was reported that oral administration of cysteine (8 mmolfkg) in-
creased serum sulfate -2-fold (7), the effectiveness of sulfur-contain-
ing compounds in generating inorganic sulfate and further generating
PAPS has not been investigated systematically. Therefore, another
important goal of this study was to clarify the contribution of sulfur-
containing amino acids and sodium sulfate to the tissue sulfate pools,
and further to determine the nature of the relationship between tissue
sulfate and PAPS pools. To increase sulfate concentrations in the
various tissues, 2-16 mmolfkg of sodium sulfate, cysteine, and me-
thionine were administered over 2 hr by intravenous infusion into
pentobarbital-anesthetized rats.
Materials and Methods
Chemicals. Sodium sulfate, L-cysteine, and L-methionine were purchased
from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). Acetonitrile and chloroform were
purchased from Fisher Scientific (Fairlawn, NJ). PAPS, [1)4C]naphthol, and
all other chemicals were obtained from Sigma.
Animal Treatments. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were obtained from Sasco,
 at ASPET Journals on January 31, 2019dmd.aspetjournals.orgDownloaded from 

I METHIONINE
1 
S-ADENOSYLMETHIONINE
24,
S-ADENOSYLHOMOCYSTEINE
34,
12 SULFATE
i/_-....NSCONJUGATES
PAP [PAPSI
#p.ADP
11 [
NATP
APS
4PPi
10
N-ATP
9t
HOMOCYSTEINE
1SERINE
CYSTATHIONINE SO
5  a-KETOBUTYRATE + NH KETOclDAMINO ACID 8t(U..PYRUVATE
I CYSTEINEJ r 6  CYSTEINESULFINATE 7 [SULFINYLPYRUVATEJ
02
FIG. 1. Pathways for generation of inorganic sulfate from cysteine and methionine, and sulfate activation.
1, L-methionine S-adenosyltransferase; 2, L-homocysteine S-methyltransferase; 3, S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine hydrolase; 4, cystathionine /3-synthetase; 5,
L-cystathionine cysteinelyase; 6, cysteine dioxygenase; 7, cysteine sulfinate transaminase; 8, nonenzymatic reaction; 9, sulfite oxidase; 10, AlP sulfurylase; 11,
APS kinase; and 12, sulfotransferases.
SULFATE-PAPS RELATIONSHIP IN VIVO
ENDOGENOUS
COMPOUNDS
or
XENOBIOTICS
841
Inc. (Omaha, NE) and maintained on a 12-hr light/dark cycle with light from
0600 to 1800 hr. Purina Rodent Chow 5001 (Ralston Purina Co., St. Louis,
MO) and tap water were provided ad libitum. The rats were used after a 1-week
acclimation period, at which time their body weight ranged from 250 to 325 g.
The rats were anesthetized with pentobarbital (60 mg/kg ip; Anthony
Products Co., Arcadia, CA). They were surgically prepared with an indwelling
carotid cannula to allow serial blood samplings. The right external jugular vein
of each animal was also cannulated to infuse the test chemicals. To ensure
unobstructed respiration, a tracheotomy was performed on each animal. So-
dium sulfate, L-cysteine, and L-methionine were dissolved in deionized-
distilled water and infused constantly for 2 hr in a volume of 1 .85 mI/hr/animal
with a Harvard Compact Infusion pump (South Natick, MA). Control animals
were infused with deionized-distilled water in the same volume. Serial blood
samples (200 pi) were taken via the carotid cannula at the following times after
treatments: 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 mm. Serum was obtained after coagu-
lation and centrifugation of collected blood samples, and analyzed for sulfate.
During the surgical procedures and sample collections, body temperature of the
animals was maintained at 36#{176}C with a heating lamp controlled by a rectal
probe thermister. Two hr after starting the infusion, liver, kidneys and brain
were removed rapidly for quantification of PAPS and sulfate. Samples were
analyzed for PAPS immediately after sample preparation, whereas samples for
sulfate analysis were stored at - 70#{176}C before analysis.
Quantification of Sulfate and PAPS. An ion-chromatographic method (8)
was used for the measurement of sulfate concentrations in serum and tissues.
Serum samples were diluted 500-fold with 1 mM NaOH. For the measurement
of sulfate concentrations in the various tissues, samples were homogenized in
3 volumes of 1 mM NaOH and centrifuged for 20 mm at 1 1,000g. The
supematant was centrifuged again for 1 hr at 1 12,500g. The resulting super-
natant from all tissues, except the brain, was further diluted 100-fold, whereas
that of brain samples was diluted 25-fold. The diluted samples were extracted
with an equal volume of chloroform and centrifuged for 10 mm at 3,000g. The
same procedure was used for blanks (1 mM NaOH). An aliquot (100 pi) of
diluted samples were injected onto an AS4A analytical column protected by an
AG4A guard column (Dionex Corp., Sunnyvale, CA). Samples were eluted
isocratically with an eluant containing 1.8 mM Na2CO3, 1.7 mM NaHCO3, and
4.5% acetonitrile at the flow rate of 2 ml/min. The Dionex BIOLC ion
chromatography system consisted of an eluent degassing module, conductivity
detector with anion micromembrane suppressor (AMMS-1) and a pump. The
system was expanded with a Waters 700 Satellite WISP automatic injector,
System Interface Module (S1M), and Digital 380 computer using Waters 840
Software (Waters Associates, Inc., Boston, MA).
PAPS concentrations in liver, kidney, and brain were determined by the
procedure of Hazelton et al. (9). This method measures the formation of
[1-’4C]naphthyl sulfate from [1-’4C]naphthol and PAPS in the presence of rat
phenol sulfotransferase.
Statistics. One-way ANOVA was used to assess the statistical significance
of changes in all indices as a function of time and dose, followed by Duncan’s
multiple range test with p < 0.05 set as the level of significance. Linear
regression analysis was performed to estimate the relationship between sulfate
concentrations and hepatic PAPS levels.
Results
The serum sulfate concentration-vs. -time profile following intrave-
nous infusion of sodium sulfate is shown in fig. 2. Sulfate levels in the
serum of control rats, infused with vehicle, did not change during the
2 hr of infusion. Thus, the pentobarbital anesthesia and surgical stress
did not affect serum sulfate levels. In most of the rats, serum sulfate
concentrations reached steady-state concentrations within 2 hr after
infusion of the various dosages of sodium sulfate. If one assumes that
the serum concentrations reached 90-95% of their steady-state con-
centration at the end of the infusions, then the half-life of sodium
sulfate is -30 mm. A dose-dependent increase in serum sulfate
concentrations was observed with an increase in infused amount; an
increase in sodium sulfate infusion from 0 to 2, 4, 8, and 16 mmol/
kg/2 hr resulted in proportional increases in serum sulfate concentra-
tions from 0.8 to 2.9, 4.2, 8.6, and 14 mM, respectively, after 2 hr of
infusions. As the infusion was increased from 0 to 16 mmol/kg/2 hr,
there was a 17.5-fold increase in serum sulfate.
The metabolic pathway for the generation of sulfate from cysteine
is depicted in fig. 1. As shown in fig. 3, this metabolic conversion
from cysteine to inorganic sulfate occurs rapidly, because the infusion
of cysteine (16 mmol/kg/2 hr) increased serum sulfate concentrations
 at ASPET Journals on January 31, 2019dmd.aspetjournals.orgDownloaded from 
E
a
0.
2.0
a
0
.
a
a
0
cm
60
Time (mm)
30 60 90 120
Time (mm)
E
I
I
842 KIM ETAL.
FIG. 2. Serum sulfate concentration-vs. -time profiles in rats following
infusion of 2-16 mmol/kgf2 hr ofsodium sulfate.
Dosages are given in parentheses. Symbols represent the means ± SE of
5-6 rats.
0 60
Time (min)
Fio. 3. Serum sulfate concentration-vs. -time profiles in rats after infusion
of2-16 mnolJkgi2 hr of cysteine.
Dosages are given in parentheses. Symbols represent the means ± SE of
5-6 rats.
80% within 15 mm of infusion. Sulfate concentrations in serum
increased linearly during the 2 hr of cysteine infusion. The plasma
sulfate increased --6-fold when cysteine (16 mmol/kg/2 hr) was
infused.
The serum sulfate concentration-vs. -time profiles during infusion of
methionine is illustrated in fig. 4. The biotransformation of methio-
nine to inorganic sulfate also produced a significant increase in serum
sulfate concentration. When rats were infused with 2, 4, 8, and 16
mmol/kg/2 hr methionine, serum sulfate concentrations increased
from 0.8 to 1.1, 1.2, 1.5, and 2.0 mM, respectively. Thus, there was
only an -2.5-fold increase in serum sulfate, as the infused amount
increased from 0 to 16 mmol/kg/2 hr.
Sulfate concentrations in liver, kidney, and brain after infusion of
sulfate, cysteine, and methionine are displayed in fig. 5. Sulfate
concentrations in liver, kidney, and brain of control rats were 0.78,
0.63, and 0.11 mM, respectively. Although the infusion of sodium
sulfate increased serum sulfate concentration 17.5-fold, it increased
liver sulfate 6-fold, kidney sulfate 50-fold, and brain sulfate 6-fold.
The serum and tissue concentrations after infusing sodium sulfate for
2 hr (16 mmol/kg/2 hr) were highest in the kidney (31 mM), followed
by serum (14 mM), liver (4.8 mM), and brain (0.6 mM).
Sulfur was also infused in the form of cysteine and methionine. The
conversions of methionine and cysteine to sulfate occur in tissues,
FIG. 4. Serum sulfate concentration-vs-time profiles in rats after infusion
of2-16 mmol/kgi2 hr of methionine.
Dosages are given in parentheses. Symbols represent the means ± SE of
5-6 rats.
probably mainly in the liver. Enhancement of tissue sulfate concen-
trations by cysteine exceeded that produced by methionine; however,
infusion of sodium sulfate was the most effective method to increase
tissue sulfate concentrations. As shown in the second panel of fig. 5,
infusions of cysteine and sodium sulfate increased hepatic sulfate
concentrations to similar levels. The capacity of metabolic conversion
of cysteine and methionine to sulfate seems to be saturated at the
dosage of 8 mmol/kg/2 hr. Cysteine was more effective than methi-
onine in increasing tissue sulfate concentrations in kidney and brain.
The effects of various dosages of sodium sulfate, cysteine, and
methionine on PAPS concentrations in liver, kidney, and brain are
presented in fig. 6. PAPS concentrations in liver, kidney, and brain of
control rats were 138, 36, and 1 1 nmol/g tissue, respectively. Despite
dramatic increases in tissue sulfate concentrations after infusion of
sulfate, cysteine and methionine, interestingly the tissue PAPS levels
were not increased markedly. Hepatic PAPS concentrations increased
significantly (30-35%) only in the groups infused with 8 or 16
mmolfkg/2 hr of sodium sulfate. PAPS concentrations in kidney and
brain were not influenced by the increase in tissue sulfate concentra-
tions. Infusions of cysteine or methionine did not increase PAPS
concentrations in liver, kidney, or brain.
To determine whether hepatic sulfate concentration is an important
determinant for hepatic PAPS concentration, we calculated the cor-
relation coefficients between hepatic sulfate concentrations and he-
patic PAPS concentrations after the three separate infusions (fig. 7).
The correlation coefficient (r) is 0 and 0.254, respectively, for infu-
sions of cysteine and methionine and hepatic PAPS concentrations.
There was a slightly higher degree of correlation (r = 0.479; p <
0.05) between hepatic sulfate concentrations and PAPS levels in rats
infused with sodium sulfate. The correlation coefficients (r) between
plasma sulfate concentrations and PAPS levels were 0.307, 0.102, and
0.527 for cysteine, methionine, and sulfate, respectively.
Discussion
For the sulfation of endogenous compounds-such as neurotrans-
mitters, steroid hormones, peptides and bile acids, as well as xenobi-
otics-inorganic sulfate is required to synthesize PAPS (10). Inor-
ganic sulfate can be obtained by absorption through the intestinal tract
and by the oxidation of sulfur-containing amino acids (7).
Our studies clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of various sulfur-
containing compounds to increase sulfate concentrations in tissues
such as liver, kidney, and brain. Sodium sulfate was the most efficient
 at ASPET Journals on January 31, 2019dmd.aspetjournals.orgDownloaded from 
SULFATE-PAPS RELATIONSHIP IN VIVO 843
4 8 12
Infusion (mmol/kg/2hr)
Infusion (mmol/kg/2hr)
FIG. 6. Effects of various dosages of sodium sulfate, cysteine. and
methionine on PAPS concentrations in various organs.
Sodium sulfate, cysteine, or methionine (2-16 mmol/kg) was infused for 2
hr, and liver, kidney, and brain taken for the quantification of tissue PAPS.
Symbols represent the means ± SE of 5-6 rats. Significantly different from
controls at p < 0.05. 0, Inorganic sulfate; #{149},L-cysteine; 0, L-methionine.
0
0
cm
I
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Hepatic Sulfate Conc (xmol/g)
7
I
0
E
0
I)
0
0
L)
FIG. 5. Dosage-dependency of the effects of sodium sulfate, cysteine, and
methionine on tissue and serum sulfate concentrations.
A total 2-16 mmollkg of sodium sulfate, cysteine, or methionine was
infused over 2 hr. Control rats received vehicle. Symbols represent the means
± SE of 5-6 rats. 0, Inorganic sulfate; #{149},L-cysteine; 0, 1-methionine.
in increasing tissue sulfate concentrations. When cysteine was used as
the sulfur source, the conversion to sulfate occurred rapidly and tissue
sulfate concentrations increased 5-fold in liver, 18-fold in kidney, and
3.5-fold in brain after the infusion of 16 mmol/kg for 2 hr (fig. 5). As
expected, the generation of sulfate from methionine is slower and less
efficient than that from cysteine. Nevertheless, the highest rate of
infusion of methionine doubled the organ sulfate concentrations (fig.
5).
L-cysteine, D-cysteine, and L-methionine have been reported to be
used in vivo and in vitro as a precursor of inorganic sulfate (7, 11-14).
A previous study of Krijgsheld et a!. (7) reported that oral adminis-
tration of L-Cysteine to rats (8 mmol/kg) caused a rapid increase in
serum sulfate, reaching concentrations twice the control levels 2 hr
after administration. Glazenburg et a!. (12) found similar results after
intravenous administration of 1 .5 mmol/kg of L-cysteine or D-cysteine,
FIG. 7. Correlations between hepatic sulfate concentrations and hepatic
PAPS levels 2 hr after infusion of various dosages of sodium sulfate,
cysteine. and methionine.
Solid line represents generated regression analysis line from the data of
sodium sulfate. Dashed line represents generated regression analysis line from
the data of cysteine. 0, Inorganic sulfate; S, L-cysteine; 0, L-methionine; U,
control.
which increased plasma sulfate levels 2- to 3-fold within 2-3 hr of
administration.
Sulfate in blood is available immediately for PAPS synthesis and
 at ASPET Journals on January 31, 2019dmd.aspetjournals.orgDownloaded from 
844 KIM ETAL.
subsequent sulfate conjugation in liver (15). For example, concomi-
tant decreases of sulfate are observed in liver, kidney, and serum of
rats administered high dosages of acetaminophen.
An interesting result of this study is that inorganic sulfate is
concentrated most in the kidneys during infusion of the three sulfur-
containing compounds. For example, the present data reveal that
sulfate concentrations after 16 mmol/kg of cysteine are 1 1 .3 mM in
kidney, but only 4.8 in serum, 3.8 in liver, and 0.4 mM in brain (fig.
5). Inorganic sulfate is eliminated primarily by glomerular filtration,
and reabsorption of sulfate occurs in the renal tubules (16). The
process of renal tubular reabsorption of sulfate is known to be capac-
ity-limited (17). The continuous filtration of sulfate anion and its
active renal absorption probably leads to a high accumulation of
inorganic sulfate in the renal tubular lumens. The kidney concentra-
tion of sulfate in this study is a combination of the sulfate in the renal
tissue and tubular fluid.
No detailed data on the in vivo uptake of sulfate into brain existed.
However, data from the present study indicate the sulfate anion does
not readily enter the brain. The concentration of sulfate in brain of
control rats is only 13% of that in serum. Sulfate concentrations in
brain can increase severalfold by infusion with sulfate, cysteine, and
methionine; the highest sulfate concentrations attained in brain was
-0.6 mM. Additional studies are required to determine the physio-
logical and pharmacological implications of these observations.
PAPS, the sulfate donor for the biosynthesis of all known sulfate
esters, is present in tissues in very low concentrations (18). The results
of the present study clearly demonstrate that tissue PAPS levels are
maintained at low concentrations even when dramatically increased
tissue sulfate concentrations are produced in liver, kidney, and brain
(figs. S and 6). This finding implies that, even at several-fold higher
than physiological sulfate concentrations, synthesis of PAPS cannot
be readily enhanced. This homeostasis of tissue PAPS in a “resting”
condition can be explained by the thermodynamic characteristics of
the two-step activation reactions. The first reaction to form APS from
sulfate and Al? is a thermodynamically unfavorable reaction having
an apparent equilibrium constant of 10_8 (1). This reaction lies far to
the left, and the reaction proceeds to a reasonable extent only when the
products of this reaction (i.e. APS and inorganic pyrophosphate) are
continuously removed. Inorganic pyrophosphate can be hydrolyzed by
pyrophosphatase, and APS can be used for formation of PAPS.
During the process of sulfation, sulfotransferases consume tissue
PAPS continuously, which accelerates the first step of the sulfate
activation reaction (2). PAYS can be synthesized very rapidly during
sulfation, estimated to be as high as 100 nmol/min/g (19). Thus, the
rate of PAPS synthesis can be controlled by the demand of PAPS,
rather than by the availability of inorganic sulfate. This concept is
supported by the present findings that increased availability of inor-
ganic sulfate by infusion of sulfur-containing compounds does not
increase steady-state PAPS concentrations in various tissues.
This study provides a possible evidence to reject the hypothesis that
the tissue sulfate pool governs PAPS synthesis. The relationship
between tissue sulfate and PAPS pool is poorly correlated, especially
after the infusion of cysteine and methionine (fig. 7). It should be
noted that the correlation coefficient between hepatic sulfate and
hepatic PAPS concentrations after administration of sodium sulfate is
higher than those after infusions of the sulfur-containing amino acids.
However, it may be suggested that tissue sulfate concentrations might
govern PAPS synthesis during the presence of an exogenous substrate
for sulfotransferase. Evidence for this suggestion is provided by the
observation that the sulfation of compounds can be increased by
administration of inorganic sulfate (20, 21) or organic sulfur-contain-
ing precursors (20, 22). Therefore, the rate of PAPS synthesis seems
to be controlled by tissue sulfate during the process of sulfation.
In conclusion, the present findings establish that exogenous inor-
ganic sulfate or its precursors, cysteine and methionine, can dramat-
ically enhance sulfate concentrations in liver, kidney, and brain, but
have minimal effects on tissue PAPS concentrations. Therefore, it
seems that steady-state PAPS concentrations in various tissues cannot
be readily modified by increasing tissue sulfate concentrations.
References
1. A. A. Farooqui: 3’-Phosphoadenosine 5’-phosphosulfate metabolism in
mammalian tissues. mt. J. Biochem. 12, 529-536 (1980).
2. J. A. Schiff and T. Saidha: Overview: inorganic sulfur and sulfate activa-
tion. Methods Enzymol. 143, 329-334 (1987).
3. J. J. Hjelle, G. A. Hazelton, and C. D. Klaassen: Acetaminophen decreases
adenosine 3’-phosphate 5’-phosphosulfate and uridine diphosphoglu-
curonic acid in rat liver. Drug Metab. Dispos. 13, 35-41 (1985).
4. P. Rozman, H. J. Kim, C. Madhu, Z. Gregus, and C. D. Klaassen:
Homeostasis of sulfate and 3’-phosphoadenosine 5’-phosphosulfate in
rats with deficient dietary intake of sulfur. Drug Metab. Dispos. 20,
374-378 (1992).
5. C. 0. Curtis: The origins of intracellular sulfate for conjugation reactions.
In “Sulfate Metabolism and Sulfate Conjugation” (G. J. Mulder, J.
Caldwell, 0. M. J. Van Kempen, and R. J. Vonk, eds), pp. 67-71.
Taylor and Francis, London, UK, 1982.
6. G. J. Mulder: Sulfate availability in vivo. In “Sulfation of Drugs and
Related Compounds” (G. J. Mulder, ed), pp. 31-52. CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL, 1981.
7. K. R. Krijgsheld, E. J. Glazenburg, E. Scholtens, and G. J. Mulder: The
oxidation of L- and r-cysteine to inorganic sulfate and taurine in the rat.
Biochem. Biophys. Acta 677, 7-12 (1981).
8. P. Rozman, H. J. Kim, C. Madhu, and C. D. Klaassen: Tissue sulfate
determination by ion chromatography. J. Chromatogr. 574, 146-149
(1992).
9. G. A. Hazelton, J. J. Hjelle, R. L. Dills, and C. D. Klaassen: A radiometric
method for the measurement of adenosine 3’-phosphate 5’-phosphosul-
fate in rat and mouse liver. Drug Metab. Dispos. 13, 30-34 (1985).
10. G. J. Mulder and W. B. Jakoby: Sulfation. In “Conjugation Reactions in
Drug Metabolism” (G. J. Mulder, ed), pp. 107-161. Taylor and Francis
Ltd., London, UK, 1990.
11. E. J. Glazenburg, I. M. C. Jenkel-Halsema, E. Scholtens, A. J. Boars, and
G. J. Mulder: Effects of variations in the dietary supply of cysteine and
methionine in liver concentrations of glutathione and “active sulfate”
(PAPS) and serum levels of sulfate, cysteine, methionine and taurine:
relation to the metabolism of acetaminophen. J. Nutr. 113, 1363-1373
(1983).
12. E. J. Glazenburg, I. M. C. Jekel-Halsema, A. Baranczyk-Kuzma, K. R.
Krijgsheld, and G. J. Mulder: D-cysteine as a selective precursor for
inorganic sulfate in the rat in vivo. Biochem. Pharmacol. 33, 625-628
(1984).
13. D. W. Sundheimer and K. Brendel: Factors influencing sulfation in iso-
lated rat hepatocytes. Life Sci. 34, 23-29 (1984).
14. D. E. Humphries, C. K. Silbert, and J. E. Silbert: Sulphation by cultured
cells: cysteine, cysteine, sulphinic acid and sulphite as sources for
proteoglycan sulphate. Biochem. J. 252, 305-308 (1988).
15. G. J. Mulder and E. Scholtens: The availability of inorganic sulfate in
blood for sulphate conjugation of drugs in rat liver in vivo. Biochem. J.
172, 247-251 (1978).
16. G. H. Mudge, W. 0. Berndt, and H. Valtin: Tubular transport of urea,
glucose, phosphate, uric acid, sulfate and thiosulfate. In “Renal Phys-
iology,” pp. 587-652. American Physiological Society, Bethesda, MD,
1973.
 at ASPET Journals on January 31, 2019dmd.aspetjournals.orgDownloaded from 
SULFATE-PAPS RELATIONSHIP IN VIVO 845
17. M. E. Morris and G. Levy: Serum concentration and renal excretion by
normal adults of inorganic sulfate after acetaminophen, ascorbic acid,
or sodium sulfate. Gun. Pharmacol. Ther. 33, 529-536 (1983).
18. E. A. Brzeznicka, G. A. Hazelton, and C. D. Klaassen: Comparison of
adenosine 3’-phosphate 5’-phosphosulfate concentrations in tissues
from different laboratory animals. Drug Metab. Dispos. 15, 133-135
(1987).
19. K. S. Pang, H. Koster, I. C. M. Halsema, E. Scholtens, and G. J. Mulder:
Aberrant pharmacokinetics of harmol in the perfused rat liver prepara-
tion: sulfate and glucuronide conjugations. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.
219, 134-140 (1981).
20. R. E. Galinsky and 0. Levy: Dose- and time-dependent elimination of
acetaminophen in rats: pharmacokinetic implications of cosubstrate
depletion. J. Pharmacol. E.xp. Ther. 219, 14-20 (1981).
21. J. H. Liu and 0. Levy: Sulfate depletion after acetaminophen administra-
tion and replenishment by infusion of sodium sulfate or N-acetylcys-
teine in rats. Biochem. Pharmacol. 30, 2723-2725 (1981).
22. J. R. Dawson, K. Norbeck, and P. Moldeus: The effectiveness of different
sulfate precursors in supporting extrahepatic sulfate conjugation. Bio-
chem. Pharmacol. 32, 1789-1791 (1983).
 at ASPET Journals on January 31, 2019dmd.aspetjournals.orgDownloaded from 