
=== PAGE 1 ===
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MO LEcULAR ME dIcINE  58:  203,  2026
Abstract. Fracture healing is a complex biological process 
involving chondrocyte (cH) differentiation and endochondral 
ossification. A subset of c Hs may transdifferentiate into 
osteoblasts, enhancing bone regeneration. The oxygen‑sensing 
histone demethylase lysine demethylase 6A (K dM6A) and 
local oxygen microenvironment are hypothesized to serve 
pivotal roles in modulating this transition; however, the 
precise regulatory mechanisms remain unclear. To assess the 
role of K dM6A, an oxygen‑sensitive histone demethylase, 
in endochondral ossification, an inducible cartilage‑specific 
Kdm6a‑knockout mouse model was generated. Single‑cell 
RNA sequencing (scRNA‑seq) analysis was performed 
in a mouse tibial fracture model to characterize c H 
subpopulations and their fate transitions during bone repair. 
scRNA‑seq identified distinct CH subpopulations, including 
chondrocyte‑derived osteoprogenitors ( cdOPs), which acted 
as osteoblast precursors during endochondral ossification. 
Pseudotime trajectory analysis revealed a bifurcated differ ‑
entiation pathway, with cd OPs exhibiting rapid osteoblast 
conversion. Functional enrichment analyses implicated the 
Wnt/β‑catenin pathway in this transition. In vitro, cHs isolated 
from bone callus of KdM6A‑knockout and control mice were 
induced to undergo transdifferentiation into osteoblasts under 
varying oxygen tensions. The expression levels of chondro ‑
genic markers, osteogenic differentiation‑related indicators 
and canonical Wnt signaling molecules, as well as the levels 
of histone dimethylation of H3K27 (H3K27me2) and trimeth‑
ylation of H3K27 (H3K27me3) at their promoter regions, were 
assessed. In vivo, the molecular and functional consequences 
of K dM6A deficiency were characterized through histo ‑
pathological evaluation and bone microarchitecture analysis. 
In vitro, cHs cultured under normoxic conditions exhibited 
greater osteogenic differentiation than those cultured under 
hypoxic conditions. conversely, loss of K dM6A impaired 
the pro‑osteogenic effect of normoxia on c H‑to‑osteoblast 
transdifferentiation, indicating the importance of K dM6A 
in oxygen‑mediated c H‑to‑osteoblast transdifferentiation. 
Mechanistically, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis 
revealed that under normoxic conditions, K dM6A‑knockout 
cHs exhibited higher levels of the repressive histone marks 
H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 at the Wnt3a promoter region, as 
well as increased H3K27me3 levels at the Runt‑related tran ‑
scription factor 2 (RUNX2) promoter region, compared with 
control cells. These findings indicated that KDM6A catalyzed 
the removal of H3K27 methylation at the promoters of Wnt3a 
and RUNX2, thereby relieving their transcriptional repres‑
sion. In vivo, K dM6A‑knockout mice exhibited osteogenic 
defects and delayed fracture healing compared with control 
mice. K dM6A serves as a pivotal oxygen sensor that drives 
cH‑to‑osteoblast transdifferentiation and enhances fracture 
healing through Wnt /β‑catenin pathway activation. The 
KdM6A‑mediated oxygen response mechanism is a potential 
target for enhancing bone regeneration during fracture repair.
Introduction
Bone fractures represent a significant global health burden, 
with an epidemiological study reporting >170 million new 
cases annually worldwide  (1). While most fractures achieve 
successful healing, 5‑10% result in delayed union or nonunion, 
creating substantial clinical and economic challenges (2). The 
Oxygen‑sensing histone demethylase KDM6A modulates 
chondrocyte‑to‑osteoblast transdifferentiation 
by activating the Wnt/β‑catenin pathway
YI RONG1,2*,  HAO YU1*,  HENG YIN1,3,  SHAOSHUO LI1,  JIANWEI WANG1,  ZHONGYUAN SHEN4,  
XINXIN dING1,  FANcHEN BU1,  TIANYI dAI1,  GEAN WU1  and  ZHEN HUA1,3
1Department of Traumatology and Orthopedics, Wuxi Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214071, 
P.R. china; 2department of Basic Medicine, School of Health Medicine, Wuxi Taihu University, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214063, P.R. china; 
3Jiangsu chinese Medicine clinical Innovation center of degenerative Bone and Joint disease, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214071, P.R. china; 
4Department of Orthopedics, The Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China
Received July 30, 2025;  Accepted February 20, 2026
DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2026.5874
Correspondence to:  d r Zhen Hua or d r Gean Wu, d epartment 
of Traumatology and Orthopedics, Wuxi Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanjing University of c hinese Medicine, 8 Zhongnan West Road, 
Wuxi, Jiangsu 214071, P.R. china
E‑mail: wxzy044@njucm.edu.cn
E‑mail: wga7025038@163.com
*contributed equally
Key words:  fracture healing, single‑cell RNA sequencing, 
endochondral ossification, chondrocyte transdifferentiation, lysine 
demethylase 6A, Wnt/β‑catenin pathway


=== PAGE 2 ===
RONG et al:  KdM6A AcTIVATES Wnt/β‑catenin IN TRANS dIFFERENTIATION2
healing process is particularly compromised in anatomically 
vulnerable sites such as the tibia, where limited soft tissue 
coverage and poor vascularity frequently impede proper 
bone regeneration (3,4). The biological complexity of fracture 
repair is exemplified by the delicate balance between multiple 
cellular processes and molecular signaling pathways that 
must be precisely coordinated across temporal and spatial 
dimensions (5).
Fracture healing occurs via two primary mechanisms: 
Intramembranous ossification at the fracture margins and 
endochondral ossification in the central callus region (6,7). The 
latter process, which involves the formation of a cartilaginous 
template that is subsequently replaced by bone, is crucial for 
healing unsfig fractures and defects with limited stability (5,8). 
The traditional understanding was that hypertrophic chon ‑
drocytes (HT cs) in cartilaginous callus undergo apoptosis 
before bone formation  (9‑12). However, emerging evidence 
from lineage‑tracing studies has fundamentally challenged 
this paradigm, demonstrating that a substantial proportion of 
HTcs can directly trans‑differentiate into osteoblasts without 
undergoing programmed cell death (13‑15). This newly recog‑
nized pathway contributes to bone regeneration, with a study 
indicating that 30‑40% of osteocytes in the callus are derived 
from chondrocytes ( cHs), reaching 80% at the chondroos‑
seous junction (15).
The fracture microenvironment is characterized by 
dynamic physicochemical gradients, with oxygen tension 
representing a key regulatory signal (16,17). The initial 
hypoxic conditions within the avascular cartilaginous callus 
gradually transition to normoxic conditions through angiogen‑
esis, creating a spatially and temporally heterogeneous oxygen 
landscape (18,19). While the hypoxia‑inducible factor‑1 α 
(HIF‑1α) pathway has been well‑established as a mediator 
of cellular adaptation to low oxygen, promoting cH survival 
and angiogenesis (16,20,21), evidence suggests that more 
direct oxygen‑sensing mechanisms operate at the epigenetic 
level to guide cell fate decisions (22,23). Histone modifica ‑
tions, particularly the methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 
(H3K27), have emerged as critical epigenetic determinants 
of cellular differentiation (24,25). Trimethylation of H3K27 
(H3K27me3), catalyzed by polycomb repressive complex 2, 
serves as a repressive mark that silences developmental 
genes (26), whereas demethylation by specific enzymes acti ‑
vates transcriptional programs (27).
Oxygen‑sensitive histone demethylase lysine demeth ‑
ylase 6A (K dM6A) represents a compelling molecular link 
between microenvironmental cues and epigenetic regula ‑
tion (22). Unlike HIF‑1α, which primarily mediates adaptive 
metabolic responses, K dM6A directly senses oxygen levels 
through its Jumonji c (Jmj c) domain and translates this 
information into epigenetic instructions by removing repres‑
sive H3K27 methylation marks (22,23). This unique property 
positions K dM6A as a potential key regulator of cell fate 
transitions in oxygen‑gradient environments, such as fracture 
calluses. Supporting this notion, K dM6A has been shown to 
be essential for embryonic development  (28,29) and serves 
critical roles in various differentiation processes, including the 
osteogenic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (30,31).
The Wnt/ β‑catenin signaling pathway has been estab ‑
lished as a master regulator of osteoblastogenesis and 
fracture healing (32‑35). Multiple studies have demonstrated 
that Wnt pathway activation enhances bone repair through 
various mechanisms, including the promotion of osteo ‑
blast differentiation and activity (36,37). Pharmacological 
approaches targeting negative regulators of this pathway, such 
as antibodies against sclerostin and d ickkopf‑1, have shown 
promising results in accelerating bone regeneration in animal 
models (38‑40). Wnt/β‑catenin signaling has been specifically 
implicated in c H‑to‑osteoblast transdifferentiation, with a 
study showing that β‑catenin stabilization in HT cs enhances 
their conversion into osteoblasts (41).
The convergence of oxygen sensing, epigenetic regula ‑
tion and canonical signaling pathways presents a compelling 
framework for understanding the coordination of c H fate 
during bone repair. A study has established connections 
between K dM6A and Wnt signaling, with RNA sequencing 
analyses revealing effects on Wnt gene expression in 
KDM6A‑deficient contexts (42). In bone marrow stromal cells, 
KDM6A directly removes H3K27me3 modifications from the 
promoter regions of osteogenic genes, including RUNX family 
transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), thereby initiating differentia‑
tion programs (30,31). However, to the best of our knowledge, 
the functional significance of this epigenetic regulator in frac‑
ture healing, particularly its role in integrating oxygen signals 
to modulate c H transdifferentiation via the Wnt/ β‑catenin 
pathway, remains unexplored.
Investigation of these mechanisms across different frac ‑
ture types has revealed intriguing patterns of interaction. 
In tibial shaft fractures, where endochondral ossification 
predominates (43), the oxygen‑K dM6A‑Wnt axis may serve 
a particularly critical role because of the prolonged hypoxic 
conditions characteristic of these injuries (30,31,42). 
Conversely, in well‑vascularized fracture sites or rigidly fixed 
fractures where intramembranous ossification predominates, 
the relative importance of this pathway may differ (22,23). 
Understanding these context‑dependent variations is essential 
for the development of targeted therapeutic approaches.
Based on these considerations, we hypothesized that 
KdM6A serves as a critical molecular nexus, linking oxygen 
sensing to c H fate determination during fracture repair. 
Specifically, we hypothesized that, in the transitioning oxygen 
environment of the healing callus, KdM6A activation promotes 
cH‑to‑osteoblast transdifferentiation by removing repressive 
H3K27 methylation marks from Wnt pathway genes, thereby 
activating the Wnt/ β‑catenin/RUNX2 signaling axis. To test 
this hypothesis, an integrated approach combining single‑cell 
RNA sequencing (scRNA‑seq) of fractured calli, lineage 
tracing and cartilage‑specific inducible Kdm6a‑knockout was 
employed. This methodological framework was designed to 
uncover the mechanisms underlying the oxygen‑dependent 
modulation of bone regeneration across different fracture 
environments and to assess its potential as a therapeutic target 
for challenging clinical scenarios, such as nonunions and 
osteoporotic fractures.
Materials and methods
Mice. All animal protocols were approved by the Animal 
care and Use committee of Wuxi Affiliated Hospital 
of Nanjing University of c hinese Medicine (approval 

=== PAGE 3 ===
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MO LEcULAR ME dIcINE  58:  203,  2026 3
no. GZR2023032801; Wuxi, c hina). Mice were housed in 
groups of ≤5 animals in a room using microisolator tech ‑
nology, and kept at 22‑24˚C with a 12‑h light /dark schedule, 
with ad libitum access to food and water.
Kdm6a‑Flox (a conditional knockout strain where 
essential exons of the Kdm6a gene are flanked by loxP 
sites), collagen type II α1 chain ( col2a1)‑2A‑tamoxifen 
(Tam)‑inducible c re recombinase ( creERT2) (expressing 
CreERT2 specifically in CHs, driven by the Col2a1 promoter) 
and R26‑cAG‑LSL‑tdTomato (a cre‑dependent reporter strain 
in which a loxP‑flanked transcriptional stop cassette prevents 
the expression of the tdTomato fluorescent protein; upon 
cre‑mediated recombination, tdTomato is expressed, perma ‑
nently labeling cre‑active cells and their progeny) mice were 
purchased from Shanghai Model Organisms c enter, Inc. All 
mutant mice had a c57/B6J background. col2a1‑2A‑creERT2 
mice were bred with R26‑ cAG‑LSL‑tdTomato mice to 
generate inducible cartilage‑specific labeled mice that 
carried a Tam‑inducible c reERT2 transgene under the 
control of the Col2a1 gene promoter for CH‑specific expres‑
sion, and the c re/loxP‑inducible Rosa‑ cAG‑LSL‑tdTomato 
reporter to mark the cells after c reER activity was induced 
by Tam injections. To generate inducible cartilage‑specific 
Kdm6a‑knockout mice, Kdm6a flox/flox  mice were bred with 
col2a1‑2A‑ creERT2&R26‑ cAG‑LSL‑tdTomato mice to 
generate Kdm6a flox/+ &col2a1‑2A‑ creERT2&R26‑ cAG‑ 
LSL‑tdTomato (fx/wt) mice, and these mice were intercrossed 
or bred with Kdm6aflox/flox mice again to generate Kdm6aflox/flox&
col2a1‑2A‑creERT2&R26‑cAG‑LSL‑tdTomato (fx/fx) mice 
and fx/wt mice (44). Fx/wt mice were used as controls. d NA 
was obtained from tail biopsy samples and genotyping was 
performed using PcR (2X Taq Plus Master Mix; P212; Vazyme 
Biotech Co., Ltd.). The conditions for amplification reactions 
were as follows: 94˚C for 3 min, followed by 34 cycles of 94˚C 
for 30 sec, 56˚C (Kdm6a‑Flox and Col2a1‑CreERT2)/58˚C 
(R26‑CAG‑LSL‑tdTomato) for 30 sec and 72˚C for 30 sec. The 
primer sequences are shown in Table  SI. The P cR products 
were separated on a 3% agarose gel, stained with GelStain 
fluorescent nucleic acid dye (TransGen Biotech Co., Ltd.) and 
visualized using a fully automatic digital gel imaging analysis 
system (Tanon Science and Technology co., Ltd.). As described 
in data S1, an example of mouse tail clipping P cR genotype 
identification results is shown in Fig. S1. A total of 120 male 
mice were used in the present study. At the start of the experi‑
ment, the mice were 6 months old, with body weights ranging 
between 25 and 30 g. According to their genotype, the mice 
were divided into two groups: The inducible cartilage‑specific 
Kdm6a‑knockout group (fx/fx; n=60) and the control group 
(fx/wt; n=60). Mice from each group were then randomly 
allocated to different experimental endpoints as follows: 
scRNA‑seq (n=6 per genotype), histological staining (n=15 per 
genotype), radiological examination (n=6 per genotype) and 
cytological experiments (n=33 per genotype). After the primary 
cHs were extracted from the mouse cartilage callus, K dM6A 
protein expression in the cells of the two groups was detected by 
western blotting to verify successful gene knockout (Fig. S2). 
Live‑cell imaging was performed during the in vitro induction 
of c H transdifferentiation into osteoblasts in the cartilage 
callus. Imaging was performed directly after transferring the 
cells into osteogenic induction culture medium. A fluorescence 
microscope (carl Zeiss AG) equipped with an environmental 
control chamber was used to maintain the cells at 37˚C with 
5% cO2 during observation. Imaging was performed for 48 h, 
capturing an image every 30 min. Fluorescence imaging 
showed that the CHs specifically expressed a clear red labeling 
signal, and the col2a1‑ creERT2/RosatdTomato model was 
successfully established (Fig. S3).
Tibial fracture model. Fx /fx and fx /wt mice were intra ‑
peritoneally injected with 75 mg /kg Tam (Sigma‑Aldrich; 
Merck KGaA) once daily for 5 days. The fracture model 
was established on the second day after induction. Mice 
were weighed and anesthetized by intraperitoneal injec ‑
tion of 0.4% pentobarbital sodium at a dose of 40 mg /kg. 
After the mice were completely anesthetized, the skin was 
prepared in front of the left tibia, and hair was removed as 
cleanly and thoroughly as possible. Mice were placed in the 
left lateral position. The surgical site on the left lower limb 
was disinfected three times with iodine, followed by draping 
with sterile fenestrated drapes. Using high‑temperature 
and high‑pressure sterilized instruments, a small incision 
of ~1 cm was made along the longitudinal axis of the left 
tibia, from the knee joint to the middle section of the tibia. 
Hemostatic forceps were used to expose the anterior edge 
of the tibia to obtain the skin, muscles and fascia. Surgical 
blade 11 was positioned at the highest point of the antero ‑
lateral protrusion of the tibia. A transverse fracture was 
created by striking the base of the blade vertically with a 
small hammer and a slight lateral movement was performed 
to confirm the fracture. A sterile 1‑ml syringe needle was 
inserted into the medulla for fixation, and the exposed needle 
was removed (45). After disinfection with Aner iodine, the 
incision was sutured layer‑by‑layer using a 5‑0 medical 
suture needle and thread. After the operation, 40,000 U 
penicillin was injected intramuscularly for 3 consecutive 
days to prevent infection. The mice were raised without any 
activity restrictions. The incision conditions and activity of 
the mice were monitored daily. Fractured callus tissues were 
harvested on days 10 and 21 post‑fracture for single‑cell 
sequencing. The samples at each time point were obtained 
from 6 different mice. Samples of the left tibiae from 12, 12 
and 18 different mice were collected on days 10, 21 and 28 
post‑fracture for radiological and histological analyses.
scRNA‑seq. Bone callus samples were dissociated into 
single‑cell suspensions. The cell concentration and viability 
were determined using a countstar Rigel S2 automated cell 
fluorescence analyzer (Shanghai Ruiyu Biotech Co., Ltd.) 
with AO /PI staining (RE010212; Shanghai Ruiyu Biotech 
co., Ltd.) and c ountstar counting slides ( cO010101; 
Shanghai Ruiyu Biotech c o., Ltd.). The concentration 
was adjusted to 700‑1,200  cells /µl. Single‑cell capture, 
barcoding and library preparation were performed using 
the c hromium Next GEM Single c ell 3' Reagent Kits v3.1 
(cat. no. 1000268; 10x Genomics). c ell suspensions were 
combined with barcoded gel beads and master mix, and 
encapsulated into gel beads‑in‑emulsion (GEMs) using a 
microfluidic system. Within the GEMs, poly (dT) primers 
bound to mRNA poly‑A tails to initiate reverse transcrip ‑
tion (RT). Full‑length barcoded c dNA was generated by 


=== PAGE 4 ===
RONG et al:  KdM6A AcTIVATES Wnt/β‑catenin IN TRANS dIFFERENTIATION4
RT using the integrated RT reagents: RT Reagent B (cat. 
no. 2000165; buffer), RT Enzyme c  (M‑MLV Reverse 
Transcriptase; cat. no. 2000085 /2000102), Template 
Switch Oligo (cat. no. 3000228) and Reducing Agent B 
(cat. no. 2000087) from the c hromium Next GEM Single 
cell 3' Reagent Kit v3.1 (10x Genomics). The RT reaction 
was performed at 53˚C for 45 min, followed by enzyme 
inactivation at 85˚C for 5 min. The GEMs were then 
broken, and the pooled cDNA was amplified by PCR using 
a high‑fidelity DNA polymerase from the Amp Mix (cat. 
no. 2000047 /2000103; 10x Genomics) with the following 
primers: Forward, 5'‑ cTA cAc GAc GcT cTT ccG ATcT‑3' 
and reverse, 5'‑AAG  cAG TGG TAT cAA cGc AGA G‑3'. 
The thermocycling conditions were as follows: 98˚C for 
3 min; cycling (12‑13 cycles, optimized for cell recovery) 
at 98˚C for 15 sec, 63˚C for 20 sec and 72˚C for 1 min; 
and 72˚C for 1 min. The quality and size distribution of 
the amplified cDNA were verified using an Agilent 2100 
Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Inc.), showing a main 
peak of 1,000‑2,000 bp. The c dNA was fragmented 
(~400 bp on average) and sequencing adapters were added. 
A final sample indexing P cR was conducted using the 
same Amp Mix and the d ual Index Kit TT Set A primers 
(cat. no. 1000215; 10x Genomics) containing unique i5 and 
i7 index sequences. The sequences were: P5 primer (with 
i5 index), 5'‑AAT  GAT AcG GcG Acc Acc GAG ATc TAc 
Ac‑N10‑AcA cTc TTT ccc TAc AcG AcG cTc‑3'; P7 primer 
(with i7 index), 5'‑ cAA GcA GAA GAc GGc ATA cGA 
GAT‑N10‑GTG  AcT GGA GTT cAG AcG TG T‑3' (where 
N10 represents the unique 10‑bp index sequence for each 
sample). The indexing PCR conditions were: 98˚C for 
45 sec; cycling (8‑16 cycles, optimized for c dNA input) at 
98˚C for 20 sec, 54˚C for 30 sec and 72˚C for 20 sec; and 
72˚C for 1 min. The concentration of the final sequencing 
library was determined by quantitative P cR (qP cR) to 
ensure accurate loading for sequencing. The quantification 
was performed using the VAHTS Library Quantification 
Kit for Illumina ® (cat. no. NQ101; Vazyme Biotech c o., 
Ltd.) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The fluores‑
cent dye premix solution and the primers (forward, 5'‑AAT  
GAT AcG GcG Acc Acc GA‑3'; reverse, 5'‑ cAA GcA GAA 
GAc GGc ATA cGA‑3') were all included in this kit. This 
method provides absolute quantification of the library. 
Briefly, a dilution series of the library was prepared and used 
as template alongside the d NA standards (cat. no. NQ105; 
Vazyme Biotech c o., Ltd.) to generate a standard curve. 
Each qP cR reaction was set up in triplicate using the 
provided premix. Amplification was carried out on a qPCR 
instrument with a standard cycling protocol appropriate 
for the kit (95˚C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95˚C 
for 30 sec and 60˚C for 45 sec). The library concentration 
was calculated according to the kit's protocol. A standard 
curve was generated using the provided d NA standards of 
known concentrations. The c t values of the library samples 
were interpolated from this standard curve to obtain a 
preliminary concentration. This value was then corrected 
for the average library length using the following formula: 
corrected concentration (pM)=[452 bp /mean library length 
(bp)] x preliminary concentration (pM). The final, accurate 
concentration of the original library (nM) was derived by 
multiplying the corrected concentration by the dilution 
factor. Following quantification, the pooled libraries were 
diluted to a final concentration of 200 pM and loaded 
onto an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 flow cell (Illumina, Inc.) 
for cluster generation and sequencing. Paired‑end 150‑bp 
sequencing was performed on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 
platform (Illumina, Inc.) using the Illumina NovaSeq 6000 
S4 Reagent Kit (cat. no. 20028312; Illumina, Inc.). Raw 
sequencing data were processed using c ellRanger (v8.0.1; 
10x Genomics). d ownstream analysis was performed in 
R (v4.1.2; https: //www.r‑project.org /) utilizing the Seurat 
package (v4.1.1; https: //satijalab.org /seurat /).
The raw sequencing data were processed using cellRanger 
for genome alignment, background cell filtering and unique 
molecular identifier (UMI) counting of cellular transcripts. 
data integration across multiple samples was performed 
using the anchor‑based canonical correlation analysis method 
as previously described (46). For the cell gene expres‑
sion matrix generated by c ellRanger, Seurat software was 
used to filter dead or stressed cells by removing cells with 
abnormal gene or UMI counts, high mitochondrial gene 
content and potential doublets. The filtering criteria were 
set as follows: Number of genes per cell, 500‑infinity; total 
UMIs per cell, < infinity; and proportion of mitochondrial 
gene expression per cell, <25%; and doublets were removed 
using the doubletFinder package (version 2.0.4; https://github.
com/chris‑mcginnis‑ucsf/ doubletFinder). The distribution 
of basic information of each sample cell after cell filtering is 
shown in Figs. S4 and S5.
After quality control, only the high‑quality cells suitable 
for downstream analyses were retained ( data S1; Tables SII 
and SIII). during data preprocessing, regression analysis was 
performed to eliminate the effects of total UMI counts and 
mitochondrial gene proportion, and expression data were 
normalized using a scale factor of 1x10 4. Highly variable 
genes were selected using the FindVariableGenes algorithm 
in the Seurat package (parameters: x.low.cutoff, 0.0125; 
y.cutoff, 0.5), and principal component analysis (P cA) was 
performed based on these genes. The top 100 significant 
principal components were selected, and cell sub‑clusters 
were identified using the Find clusters function (derived 
from Seurat v4.1.1; dims, 1:30; resolution, 0.5). Finally, 
uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) 
was employed for dimensionality reduction and visualization 
of the gene expression data.
Following cell clustering and annotation, the expression 
patterns of key marker genes across subpopulations were 
visualized. UMAP plots depicting the expression of individual 
genes were generated using the FeaturePlotfunction in Seurat, 
where color intensity corresponds to the expression level of 
the feature gene in each cell. Violin plots were used to display 
the distribution of expression for these marker genes across 
the annotated cell clusters. Additionally, a dot plot was created 
to summarize the expression of characteristic marker genes 
across the main c H‑osteoblast lineage subpopulations. In 
this plot, the size of the dot represents the percentage of cells 
within a cluster expressing the gene, and the color gradient 
indicates the mean expression level.
Based on marker genes and referencing the cellMarker2.0 
database (http://117.50.127.228/ cellMarker/), cell type 

=== PAGE 5 ===
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MO LEcULAR ME dIcINE  58:  203,  2026 5
annotation was performed. For enrichment analysis, genes with 
specific high expression in each cell subcluster (top 10) were 
subjected to Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of 
Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis 
using the clusterProfiler R package (v4.2.2; https://biocon ‑
ductor.org/packages/clusterProfiler) to interpret potential 
biological functions. The enrichment results were visualized 
using the ggplot2 package (v3.4.0; https://cran.r‑project.
org/web/packages/ggplot2/index.html), with bubble plots and 
bar charts displaying significantly enriched pathways. Gene 
set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was conducted using GSEA 
software (v4.4.0; https://www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/), and 
the results were visualized using the GseaVis R package 
(v0.1.1; https://github.com/junjunlab/GseaVis).
Pseudotime trajectory analysis of CH‑to‑osteoblast trans ‑
differentiation. Pseudotime trajectories were constructed 
by integrating highly variable genes from cell subpopula ‑
tions using Monocle3 (v1.3.4; http: //cole‑trapnell‑lab.github.
io/monocle3 /). Trajectory visualization was achieved in 
combination with UMAP . The learn‑graph algorithm was 
employed to define c Hs as the root of the trajectory, and 
dynamic changes in gene expression along pseudotime were 
analyzed using the plot‑genes‑in‑pseudotime function.
CellChat‑based cell‑cell communication analysis. The dataset 
was analyzed using the c ellchat package (version 2.1.2; 
https: //github.com /sqjin /cell chat) in R (version 4.4.1; 
https://www.r‑project.org/). cellchat models the intercellular 
communication probability by applying the law of mass action 
and integrating gene expression data with prior knowledge of 
the interactions among signaling ligands, receptors and their 
cofactors. Based on cell type annotation and identification 
of upregulated genes, the compute communProb function 
was used to infer ligand‑receptor interaction probabilities, 
the compute communProbPathway function was used to 
quantify pathway‑level communication strength and key 
interactions were visualized as chord diagrams using the 
netVisual‑chord‑gene function.
H&E and safranin O‑Fast Green staining. After fixation 
in 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 24 h, the 
samples were decalcified in an EDTA decalcification solution 
at room temperature. The decalcification solution was changed 
every 2‑3 days. during each solution change, the progress of 
decalcification was assessed by testing the tissue firmness. 
Decalcification was considered complete when a 1‑ml syringe 
needle could be inserted into the tibial cortex without resistance. 
Once decalcification was complete, tibial specimens were rinsed 
under running water for 4 h, dehydrated, cleared, embedded in 
paraffin and sectioned. The thickness of sections was 3 µm. The 
sections were stained with H&E (Beijing Solarbio Science & 
Technology co., Ltd.) using hematoxylin solution for 5 min and 
eosin solution for 1 min, and safranin O‑Fast Green (Wuhan 
Servicebio Technology co., Ltd.) using Fast Green for 5 min 
followed by Safranin O for 2 min according to the manufac ‑
turer's instructions at room temperature. Images were acquired 
using a panoramic digital slide scanner (3 dHISTEcH, Ltd.), 
which is a high‑resolution whole‑slide imaging system based on 
bright‑field light microscopy.
Immunofluorescence staining. The sample fixation and decal‑
cification steps were the same as those for H&E and safranin 
O‑Fast Green staining. The thickness of paraffin sections 
was 3 µm. The paraffin sections were placed one by one into 
xylene I and xylene II for dewaxing for 10 min each, then 
soaked in absolute ethanol I and absolute ethanol II for 5 min 
each, rehydrated in 95, 85 and 75% ethanol for 3 min each, 
and finally rinsed in distilled water for 2 min. Subsequently, 
the paraffin sections were immersed in a 1X antigen retrieval 
solution and heated at 100˚C for 20 min. After cooling to 
room temperature, the sections were washed with PBS. 
Permeabilization was performed by incubating the tissues with 
Triton X‑100 (ready‑to‑use working solution; cat. no. P0096; 
Beyotime Biotechnology) for 30 min, followed by incubation 
with 3% BSA (Beijing Biosynthesis Biotechnology co., Ltd.) 
at room temperature for 30 min to block nonspecific binding. 
The sections were then incubated overnight at 4˚C with 
diluted primary antibody [anti‑osteocalcin (O cN); 1:400; cat. 
no. ER1919‑20; Hangzhou HuaAn Biotechnology Co., Ltd.] 
After washing with PBS, the sections were incubated with a 
fluorescent secondary antibody [anti‑rabbit IgG (H+L), F(ab')2 
Fragment; Alexa Fluor® 488 conjugate; 1:1,000; cat. no. 4412; 
cell Signaling Technology, Inc.] in the dark at room tempera‑
ture for 50 min. After washing with PBS, the nuclei were 
counterstained with d API at room temperature for 10 min. 
Fluorescence images were acquired using a panoramic digital 
slide scanner, and analyzed using ImageJ software (1.54p; 
National Institutes of Health).
CH isolation from the fracture callus. On day 10 after model‑
ling, c Hs were isolated from the fracture calli of the mice. 
The mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation, and the left 
lower limb was removed and placed in a pre‑chilled culture 
dish containing PBS supplemented with penicillin‑strepto ‑
mycin at a 1:9 ratio. Using sterilized instruments, the skin was 
incised at the knee joint, and the surrounding hair, muscle, 
fascia and vascular tissues were carefully separated to expose 
the fracture site. The cartilaginous callus was isolated from 
the surrounding fibrous tissue, and translucent cartilage was 
scraped off using a blade, taking care to remove cortical 
bone and other bony tissues. A randomly selected piece of 
the removed cartilage tissue was subjected to Alcian blue and 
Alizarin red combined staining (data not shown) to ensure 
that the cartilage tissue collected did not contain bone tissue. 
Briefly, the tissue fragment was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde 
at 4˚C for 24  h, embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 4  µm 
thickness. Sections were stained with Alcian Blue (pH 2.5) for 
30 min and Alizarin Red S solutions for 5 min at room temper‑
ature according to standard protocols, and observed under a 
light microscope (Olympus BX53; Olympus corporation).
The collected cartilage was placed in a pre‑chilled culture 
dish containing PBS with penicillin‑streptomycin (1:9 ratio) 
and kept on ice. The cartilage was cut into small fragments of 
~1 mm using fine scissors, and the cartilage fragments were 
transferred into a 15‑ml centrifuge tube.
Subsequently, 4 ml of 0.25% trypsin‑E dTA solution 
was added and the sample was incubated at 37˚C for 15  min 
to remove any attached fibroblasts or osteoblasts. During 
digestion, the tube was manually shaken for 15  sec every 
5 min to ensure complete digestion. The digestion was 


=== PAGE 6 ===
RONG et al:  KdM6A AcTIVATES Wnt/β‑catenin IN TRANS dIFFERENTIATION6
terminated by adding 4 ml complete c H medium [10% FBS 
(Sigma‑Aldrich; Merck KGaA), 1% penicillin‑streptomycin 
and 89% DMEM/F12 (1:1) (HyClone; Cytiva)], and the 
sample was centrifuged at 200 x g at 4˚C for 5 min. The 
supernatant was discarded and the tissue was washed twice 
with PBS.
A mixture of 1  ml hyaluronidase (1  mg/ml; ~400  U), 1 
ml collagenase IA (2 mg/ml; >250 U) and 1 ml d Nase II 
(0.25 mg/ml; >250 U) was prepared, and 3 ml of this enzyme 
mixture was added to the tissue. The samples were digested 
at 37˚C for 30 min in an incubator. Digestion was terminated 
by adding 3 ml complete c H medium, and the sample was 
centrifuged at 200 x g at 4˚C for 5 min. The supernatant from 
the first 30‑min digestion was discarded to remove remaining 
fibroblasts and osteoblasts.
A new aliquot (3 ml) of the enzyme mixture was then 
added, and the tissue was digested for an additional 30 min at 
37˚C. After adding 3 ml complete medium to terminate diges‑
tion and allowing the cartilage to settle, the supernatant was 
collected and filtered through a 70‑µm cell strainer, followed 
by centrifugation at 200 x g at 4˚C for 5 min. The supernatant 
was removed and the cell pellet was gently resuspended in 
1 ml complete cH medium.
This process of enzymatic digestion, centrifugation and 
cell collection was repeated with a freshly prepared enzyme 
mixture until all cHs were released, as indicated by the absence 
or minimal presence of cell pellets in the centrifuge tube after 
spinning the supernatant from the digestion. This protocol can 
yield highly purified cartilage cell preparations characterized 
by strong expression of cartilage formation markers and a 
strong tendency for cells to synthesize a cartilage matrix rich 
in proteoglycans (47).
Hypoxic culture and osteogenic induction. After cHs isolated 
from the fracture callus in both groups of mice had established 
stable growth to the appropriate size and density under hypoxic 
conditions (6% O2), the cells were randomly divided into four 
groups: fx /wt hypoxia group (continued culture in 6% O 2), 
fx/wt normoxia group (cultured in 21% O 2), fx /fx hypoxia 
group (continued culture in 6% O2) and fx/fx normoxia group 
(cultured in 21% O2). The oxygen concentrations of 6 and 21% 
were selected based on the established oxygen‑sensing property 
of KdM6A. A seminal study demonstrated that the enzymatic 
activity of its Jmjc domain was inhibited below ~5% O2 (22). 
Therefore, 6% O2 represents a point where activity potentially 
begins to recover, while 21% O2 (atmospheric level) reflects its 
fully active state. This range allows interrogation of the func ‑
tional continuum of KdM6A from inhibition to full activation, 
thereby enabling a clear analysis of the axis linking oxygen 
levels, KdM6A‑mediated epigenetic regulation and cell fate.
The original cH culture medium [10% fetal bovine serum, 
1% penicillin‑streptomycin and 89% DMEM/F12 (1:1)] was 
replaced with osteogenic induction medium [ α‑Minimum 
Essential Medium (Hy clone; c ytiva) supplemented 
with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% L‑glutamine, 1% peni ‑
cillin‑streptomycin, 10 mM β‑glycerophosphate, 0.2  mM 
ascorbate‑2‑phosphate and 100  ng/ml bone morphogenetic 
protein 2 (BMP‑2)] to induce the transdifferentiation of c Hs 
into osteoblasts at 37˚C for 7 days. The culture medium was 
replaced every 2‑3 days.
Alcian blue, alizarin red and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 
staining. After 7 days of osteogenic induction, the cells 
seeded in 24‑well plates (2.5x10 4/cm2) were removed from 
the incubator. The culture medium was discarded and the 
cells were washed with PBS and fixed with 4% cell fixative 
(P1110; Beijing Solarbio Science & Technology c o., Ltd.) at 
room temperature for 15 min. According to the manufacturer's 
protocols, staining was performed as follows: Alcian blue 
(E670107; Sangon Biotech co., Ltd.) staining for 30 min at 
room temperature, ALP (G1481; Beijing Solarbio Science & 
Technology Co., Ltd.) staining for 2 h at 37˚C and Alizarin red 
(G1038; Wuhan Servicebio Technology co., Ltd.) staining for 
30 min at room temperature. Images were observed under a 
light microscope and analyzed using ImageJ software (1.54p; 
National Institutes of Health).
RT‑qPCR. Total mRNA was extracted from each cell sample 
using TRNzol reagent (Tiangen Biotech co., Ltd.), and cdNA 
was obtained by RT using the PrimeScript ™ FAST RT 
reagent Kit with g dNA Eraser (Takara Bio, Inc.) according 
to the manufacturer's instructions. Reverse‑transcribed c dNA 
was used as the template, and primers and TB Green Premix 
Ex Taq II (Tli RNaseH Plus) (Takara Bio, Inc.) were added 
to perform qPCR. The amplification reaction conditions were 
as follows: 95˚C for 30 sec, followed by 40 cycles of 95˚C 
for 5 sec and 60˚C for 34 sec. Finally, β‑actin was used as 
an internal reference, and the relative expression levels of the 
target genes were calculated using the 2‑ΔΔCq method (48). The 
mRNA levels of col2a1, collagen type X α1 chain (col10a1), 
aggrecan (Acan), collagen type  I α1 chain ( col1a1), secreted 
phosphoprotein 1 (Spp1), secreted protein acidic and cysteine 
rich (Sparc) and β‑actin were analyzed using the primer 
sequences listed in Table I.
Western blotting. The protein extraction buffer was prepared 
with a ratio of RIPA lysis buffer (Jiangsu Kangwei century 
Biotechnology co., Ltd.) to proteinase inhibitor mixture 
(Jiangsu Kangwei century Biotechnology co., Ltd.) of 100:1. 
cells were lysed in the protein extraction buffer on ice for 
20 min to extract protein samples. When analyzing dimethyl ‑
ation of H3K27 (H3K27me2) and H3K27me3, nuclear lysates 
were prepared using the Nuclear and c ytoplasmic Protein 
Extraction Kit (P0028; Beyotime Biotechnology), with histone 
H3 serving as the nuclear reference. The protein concentra ‑
tion was determined using the B cA method. Equal amounts 
(20 µg/lane) of protein were loaded onto a sodium dodecyl 
sulfate‑polyacrylamide gel (4‑12%) for electrophoresis. After 
electrophoresis, the proteins were transferred to a PV dF 
membrane, and the membrane was blocked with a protein‑free 
rapid blocking solution (Boster Biological Technology) at 
room temperature for 10  min. Primary antibodies, including 
anti‑KdM6A antibody (1:1,000; cat. no. 33510; cell Signaling 
Technology, Inc.), anti‑Wnt3a antibody (1:1,000; cat. no. 2391; 
cell Signaling Technology, Inc.), anti‑ β‑catenin antibody 
(1:1,000; cat. no. 37447; c ell Signaling Technology, Inc.), 
anti‑RUNX2 antibody (1:1,000; cat. no. ab236639; Abcam), 
anti‑GAP dH antibody (1:2,000; cat. no. ab8245; Abcam), 
anti‑histone H3 (di methyl K27) antibody (1:1,000; cat. 
no. 9728; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.), anti‑histone H3 (tri 
methyl K27) antibody (1:1,000; cat. no.  9733; Cell Signaling 

=== PAGE 7 ===
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MO LEcULAR ME dIcINE  58:  203,  2026 7
Technology, Inc.) and anti‑histone H3 antibody (1:2,000; cat. 
no. 4499; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.), diluted in antibody 
diluent according to the manufacturer's instructions, were then 
added for incubation overnight at 4˚C with gentle shaking. The 
membranes were washed with TBS with 0.1% Tween‑20 and 
incubated with the appropriate horseradish peroxidase‑conju ‑
gated secondary antibodies (1:4,000; cat. no. S0001 or S0002; 
Affinity Biosciences, Ltd.) at room temperature for 1 h. The 
proteins were then exposed and stained with EcL reagent. On 
the same membrane, different primary antibodies were incu ‑
bated successively. Before changing the primary antibody, the 
previous round of primary /secondary antibodies was eluted 
with Stripping buffer (Beyotime Biotechnology). The target 
bands were analyzed using ImageJ software (1.54p; National 
Institutes of Health) for gray‑value calculations.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation‑PCR (ChIP‑PCR). 
chIP‑PcR was used to observe the changes in H3K27me2 and 
H3K27me3 in the promoter region of Wnt3a, β‑catenin and 
RUNX2 in the fx /wt normoxia group and the fx /fx normoxia 
group after 3 days of osteogenic induction. The chIP assay was 
performed using the chIP Assay Kit (cat. no. P2078; Beyotime 
Biotechnology) according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
The cells were treated with 1% formaldehyde to form cova ‑
lent cross‑links between intracellular d NA‑bound proteins 
and dNA and the cross‑linking reaction was quenched with 
125 mM glycine. cells were lysed with 1 mM PMSF in S dS 
Lysis Buffer (included in the chIP Assay Kit) (200 µl/106 cells), 
and the genomic d NA was subsequently fragmented by 
sonication (20 kHz; 4 sec pulse; 8 sec interval; at a rate of 
5 times per min for a total of 5 min in an ice‑water bath) to 
obtain random fragments typically ranging between 200 and 
1,000 bp. Specific antibodies against the target proteins were 
used, including anti‑histone H3 (di methyl K27) (1:50; cat. 
no. 9728; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.), anti‑histone H3 (tri 
methyl K27) (1:50; cat. no. 9733; Cell Signaling Technology, 
Inc.) and IgG (cat. no. 2729; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.). 
These antibody‑chromatin complexes were subsequently 
captured with 60 µl Protein A+G Agarose beads (included in 
the chIP Assay Kit) to enrich the dNA fragments bound by the 
target proteins. Subsequently, the instructions in the kit (cat. 
no. P2078; Beyotime Biotechnology) were followed to wash 
the precipitate. The wash procedure was performed sequen ‑
tially with Low Salt Immune complex Wash Buffer, High 
Salt Immune complex Wash Buffer, Li cl Immune complex 
Wash Buffer and TE Buffer. The cross‑linking of proteins and 
DNA was relieved by centrifugation (1,000 x g; 1 min; 4˚C) 
and heating, and proteins were degraded using proteinase K. 
The enriched d NA fragments were purified using a d NA 
purification kit (cat. no. D0033; Beyotime Biotechnology). 
Purified DNA was used as a template for PCR amplification 
using PrimeSTAR ® HS dNA Polymerase (Takara Bio, Inc.). 
The primer sequences are listed in Table  II. The amplifica ‑
tion reaction conditions were as follows: 30 cycles of 98˚C for 
10 sec, 60˚C for 15 sec and 72˚C for 50 sec. The PCR products 
were separated by 1.5% agarose gel electrophoresis, stained 
with GelStain fluorescent nucleic acid dye (TransGen Biotech 
co., Ltd.) and visualized using a fully automatic digital gel 
imaging analysis system (Tanon Science and Technology co., 
Ltd.).
Table I. Nucleotide sequences of primers used for reverse transcription‑quantitative PcR.
Target gene Forward primer (5'‑3') Reverse primer (5'‑3')
col2a1 AGAGGGGAcTGAAGGGAcAcc GccAGGGATTccATTAGAGcc
col10a1 GcTGccTcAAATAcccTTTcTGc GGAATGccTTGTTcTccTcTTAcTG
Acan TAGAAcccTcGGGcAGAAGAAAG cTGTAGccTGTGcTTGTAGGTGTTG
col1a1 GGcAAcAGTcGcTTcAccTAcAG GAGGTcTTGGTGGTTTTGTATTcG
Spp1 cTGATGAAcAGTATccTGATGccAc GGGAcTccTTAGAcTcAccGcT
Sparc TTGGcGAGTTTGAGAAGGTATGc AGGTGAccAGGAcATTTTTGAGc
Wnt3a GGAGTTTGccGATGccAGGGAG AccAccAGcAGGTcTTcAcTTcAcAG
β‑catenin TcGTGcTGGTGAcAGGGAAGAc GcAGTccATAATGAAGGcGAAcG
RUNX2 GGAATGATGAGAAcTAcTccGccG GAAAcTcTTGccTcGTccGcTc
β‑actin AGGTcATcAcTATTGGcAAcGAG TTGGcATAGAGGTcTTTAcGGAT
Acan, aggrecan; col1a1, collagen type I α1 chain; col10a1, collagen type X α1 chain; col2a1, collagen type II α1 chain; RUNX2, RUNX 
family transcription factor 2; Sparc, secreted protein acidic and cysteine rich; Spp1, secreted phosphoprotein 1.
Table II. Nucleotide sequences of primers used for chromatin 
immunoprecipitation‑PCR amplification.
Target
gene Primer sequence (5'‑3') Size, bp
Wnt3a  473
  Forward AGGGTcTTTTcTcTGGGcTAcAA 
  Reverse ATcTcAAccTATGGGGGTcAcAG 
β‑catenin  657
  Forward TTGAcAAGTGccAATcGTGAAGG 
  Reverse AAAGTAGTccccGccAGTccG 
RUNX2  890
  Forward AcTGTccAcGcTGATGAAAGAAT 
  Reverse TGTcTcTTTAcTTATGGGTGTTccT 
RUNX2, RUNX family transcription factor 2.


=== PAGE 8 ===
RONG et al:  KdM6A AcTIVATES Wnt/β‑catenin IN TRANS dIFFERENTIATION8
Micro‑CT analysis. Micro‑ cT was used to assess the bone 
structure and fracture healing (49). At 28 days post‑fracture, 
the mice underwent in  vivo micro‑ cT scanning and 
three‑dimensional reconstruction to observe morphological 
changes at the fracture site. The mice were initially anesthe ‑
tized in an induction chamber with 4% isoflurane delivered 
in air at a flow rate of 1  l/min via a gas anesthesia machine. 
Once anesthetized, the mouse was transferred to a nose cone 
for maintenance on 1.8% isoflurane in air at a flow rate of 
0.8 l/min throughout the scanning procedure. The positions 
of the mouse and scanning chamber were carefully fixed, 
an appropriate scanning bed was selected, and imaging was 
performed, followed by three‑dimensional reconstruction to 
obtain images for subsequent analysis.
For ex vivo scanning, the bone samples were placed in a 
small sample holder for scanning and three‑dimensional recon‑
struction to collect data for subsequent analyses. On day 28 
post‑fracture, tibial specimens were collected and then fixed in 
4% paraformaldehyde at 4˚C for 48 h. After fixation, the samples 
were wrapped in gauze and placed in a small ex vivo chamber 
for standard micro‑ cT scanning and three‑dimensional 
reconstruction (parameters: tube voltage, 70 kV; tube current, 
150 µA; reconstruction algorithm, Feldkamp‑ davis‑Kress; 
resolution, 1k x 1k). After reconstruction, the images were 
segmented and bone analysis was performed using Avatar3 
software [2.0.12.0; PINGSENG Healthcare (Kunshan) Inc.]. 
The region of interest was defined as an area 1 mm above and 
below the fracture line. Quantitative analyses were performed 
to determine the trabecular bone volume fraction (BV/TV), 
trabecular bone surface area fraction (BS/TV), trabecular 
number (Tb.N) and trabecular thickness (Tb.Th).
Statistical analysis. c luster‑specific marker genes were 
identified using the Wilcoxon rank‑sum test implemented in 
the FindAllMarkers function of the Seurat package, with an 
adjusted P‑value <0.05 and |avglog 2 fold change (F c)|>0.25 
as thresholds. differentially expressed genes between groups 
were explored using the FindMarkers function with the 
built‑in Wilcoxon rank‑sum test, with an adjusted P‑value 
<0.05 and |avglog 2Fc|>0.15. The experimental data were 
obtained from at least three independent replicates. Statistical 
analyses of all data were performed using GraphPad Prism 
(version 8.0.2; d otmatics). d ata were normally distributed. 
comparisons between two groups were analyzed using a 
two‑tailed, unpaired Student's t‑test. For comparisons among 
multiple groups, one‑way ANOVA was performed, followed 
by Tukey's post hoc test. data are presented as the mean ± Sd. 
P<0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically significant 
difference.
Results
Transcriptional landscape of callus tissue during mouse 
fracture healing. First, six fx/wt (WT) mouse fracture callus 
samples were analyzed, including three samples collected at 
10 days post‑fracture (WT1_10, WT2_10 and WT3_10) and 
three samples collected at 21 days post‑fracture (WT1_21, 
WT2_21 and WT3_21). Following quality control and data 
filtering, 56,189 high‑quality deeply sequenced cells were 
obtained and 25 distinct clusters were identified. Each cluster 
was defined by comparing its expression profile with that of 
known lineage markers or canonical gene signatures.
during cell annotation, dimensionality reduction and 
unbiased clustering were performed based on gene expression 
profiles and classical markers of the cells, resulting in the 
identification of 19 clusters (Fig. 1A). There were distinct differ‑
ences in the UMAP plots between callus samples collected 10 
and 21 days after fracture, indicating different cellular compo‑
sitions at these stages (Fig. 1B). The present study focused 
particularly on six cH subpopulations: i)  Proliferative cHs, 
characterized by high expression levels of Ucma, c 1qtnf3, 
cnmd, Itm2a and Scrg1; ii) pre‑HT cs, marked by elevated 
levels of cdkn1c, Hapln1, Ppa1, Pth1r and Snorc; iii) HT cs, 
expressing col10a1, cst3, Spp1, Ihh and ddit4l; iv) cH‑derived 
osteoprogenitors ( cdOPs), distinguished by high expression 
levels of Mmp13, Spp1, osteomodulin (Omd), matrix Gla 
protein (Mgp) and MAF bZIP transcription factor B (Mafb); 
v) osteoblasts, identified by the expression of Bglap, Bglap2, 
Ifitm5, Ibsp and Col1a1; and vi) osteoclasts, which specifically 
expressed Acp5, Ctsk, Ckb, S100a4 and Mmp9 (Fig. 1C).
Proportion plots were generated for each cell type 
(Fig. 1d). At 10 days post‑fracture, cHs in the tissue were in 
a rapid proliferative phase, with pre‑HTcs, HTcs and cdOPs 
constituting a larger proportion. Osteoblasts were already 
present but at relatively low levels. By day 21, the proportion 
of cHs had markedly decreased, indicating that hypertrophy 
and transdifferentiation were near completion, whereas the 
numbers of endothelial cells and osteoclasts had increased, 
accelerating vascular invasion and cartilage matrix degrada ‑
tion.
The volcano plot demonstrated that a special cdOP 
subset was distinguished by the co‑expression of a specific 
set of marker genes, including Mmp13, Spp1, Mgp, Omd and 
Mafb (Fig. 1E). The expression profiles of key representa ‑
tive genes during c H transdifferentiation, including col2a1, 
Sox9, Col10a1, Mmp13, RUNX2, Spp1, Sp7 (Osx) and Col1a1, 
were examined and visualized using UMAP and violin 
plots (Fig. 1F and G). d ot plot analysis revealed that cd OPs 
co‑expressed col2a1 and col1a1, and lacked HT c marker 
col10a1, suggesting active matrix mineralization, remodeling 
and proliferation (Fig. 1H) (35).
Systematic functional analysis of endochondral ossifica ‑
tion‑related differentially expressed gene clusters in cd OPs 
revealed that the core differential genes, according to GO func‑
tional annotation, were significantly enriched in key biological 
processes such as ‘protein binding’ (molecular function), ‘chon‑
drocyte differentiation’ (biological process) and ‘skeletal system 
development’ (cellular component). Notably, these genes were 
highly associated with ‘ossification’ and ‘bone development’ 
(Fig. 1I). KEGG pathway enrichment analysis further demon‑
strated that the differential genes were primarily involved in the 
‘FoxO signaling pathway’ , ‘TGF‑β signaling pathway’ , ‘MAPK 
signaling pathway’ , ‘EcM‑receptor interaction’ and ‘PI3K‑Akt 
signaling pathway’ (Fig.  1J). These pathways collectively 
mediate the establishment of the osteogenic microenvironment 
through the coordinated regulation of cell cycle progression, 
proliferative and differentiation dynamics, migratory and adhe‑
sive behaviors, and matrix remodeling capacity. The significant 
enrichment of ‘signaling pathways regulating pluripotency of 
stem cells’ (Fig. 1J) suggested that cdOPs may possess the 

=== PAGE 9 ===
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MO LEcULAR ME dIcINE  58:  203,  2026 9
Figure 1. Transcriptional landscape of callus tissue during mouse fracture healing. (A) UMAP plot displaying 19 major cell types identified in the callus tissue. 
(B) UMAP plots of tissue samples collected from WT mice at 10 and 21 days post‑fracture. ( c) UMAP plots showing six subpopulations of c H‑osteoblast 
lineage cells. (d) Proportion plots of the cell types of interest for each tissue sample. (E) Volcano plots of differentially expressed genes for the subpopulations 
of interest. (F) UMAP plots of characteristic marker genes for c H‑osteoblast subpopulations. d eeper colors indicate higher expression levels of the feature 
gene in specific cell populations. (G) Expression profiles of the key representative genes in each subpopulation during CH transdifferentiation. (H) Dot plot 
showing the expression of 14 characteristic marker genes across the six subpopulations. d ot size represents the proportion of cells expressing a particular 
marker, whereas the color gradient indicates the average expression level of the marker. (I) Bubble plot of GO functional enrichment analysis of genes in 
cluster 5 (cdOP). (J) Bar plot of KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of genes in cluster 5 ( cdOP). For each timepoint, callus tissues were harvested from 
three independent mice (n=3 biologically independent animals per timepoint). cd OP, chondrocyte‑derived osteoprogenitor; cH, chondrocyte; cTL, cytotoxic 
T lymphocyte; FAM, fibroblastic reticular cell‑associated macrophage; GO, Gene Ontology; HTC, hypertrophic chondrocyte; KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of 
Genes and Genomes; UMAP, uniform manifold approximation and projection; WT, wild‑type.


=== PAGE 10 ===
RONG et al:  KdM6A AcTIVATES Wnt/β‑catenin IN TRANS dIFFERENTIATION10
potential for mesenchymal stem cell differentiation toward the 
osteogenic lineage.
Differentiation of CDOPs into osteoblasts during endochon ‑
dral ossification is regulated by the oxygen environment. 
Based on trajectory inference analysis of single‑cell transcrip‑
tomic data, the present study utilized the Monocle3 algorithm 
to perform pseudo‑time modeling of six relevant cell subpopu‑
lations involved in the transdifferentiation process of c Hs. 
UMAP nonlinear dimensionality reduction (Fig. 2A) was used 
to construct a continuum of cellular states, followed by integra‑
tion with RNA velocity to resolve the topological structure of 
the cell differentiation trajectories. Using c Hs as the starting 
point of the trajectory (pseudotime t=0), the results revealed a 
pronounced bifurcation in cell fate with no table bidirectional 
heterogeneity: The primary branch (branch 1) culminated in 
osteoblasts as the terminally differentiated state, while the 
secondary branch (branch 2) terminated in HT cs. Notably, 
osteoblasts were strictly localized to the terminal region 
of branch 1 along the pseudotime axis, with no significant 
temporal overlap in transcriptomic features with intermediate 
cell states, such as the cd OP subpopulation, suggesting that 
this subpopulation may undergo a rapid terminal differentiation 
program. By contrast, HT cs and cd OPs exhibited partially 
overlapping segments along the pseudo‑time axis, indicating 
that they may share transitional regulatory networks. Further 
analysis examined the temporal changes in the expression of 
characteristic genes at various time points and across different 
cell subpopulations ( Fig. 2B and c). Pseudotime analysis 
showed that 1700025G04Rik was highly expressed during the 
early stages of cH transdifferentiation, suggesting its potential 
role in driving the differentiation process. collagen type III α1 
chain (col3a1) is primarily distributed in blood vessels, marking 
vascular ingrowth during differentiation, and together with 
col1a1, helps maintain tissue tensile strength (50). collagen 
type  V α2 chain ( col5a2) serves a regulatory role in the 
assembly of Col1a1, thereby influencing collagen fiber diam ‑
eter and organization of the extracellular matrix  (51). Serpin 
family E member 2 (Serpine2) inhibits plasmin and thrombin, 
thereby regulating E cM remodeling, axon guidance and 
synaptic plasticity (52). Myosin IB (Myo1b), an unconventional 
myosin, modulates the interplay between the cell membrane 
and the cytoskeleton through its association with actin. Myo1b 
participates in vesicle trafficking and cell migration, and 
serves a crucial role in the regulation of diverse cellular func ‑
tions, including cell proliferation and apoptosis (53). d uring 
the transdifferentiation process, col5a2, Myo1b and Serpine2 
expression progressively increased, peaking at the terminal 
stage, whereas col3a1 expression remained s table during the 
cH phase and was gradually downregulated upon osteoblast 
commitment. Taken together, these findings suggested that 
cdOPs are the precursor subpopulations of osteoblasts, 
whereas conventional HT cs maintain paracrine regulatory 
roles during endochondral ossification.
GO functional enrichment analysis of the top 100 differen‑
tially expressed genes (Fig. 2 d) revealed the following: First, 
the core biological themes were skeletal development and 
remodeling, as evidenced by terms such as ‘endochondral ossi‑
fication’ , ‘skeletal system development’ and ‘ossification’. There 
were also implicit connections, such as strong enrichment of 
‘EcM proteoglycans’ and the ‘PId INTEGRIN1 PATHWAY’ , 
indicating that dynamic remodeling of the extracellular matrix 
was a driving force in bone formation. Second, crosstalk 
between signaling pathways was apparent: The enrichment of 
the ‘PId INTEGRIN1 PATHWAY’ along with the ‘response 
to mechanical stimulus’ suggested that integrins may regulate 
cH differentiation by sensing mechanical signals (such as 
the piezoelectric effect in bones). The ‘PI d SYN dEcAN 4 
PATHWAY’ and its association with E cM proteoglycans 
may mediate cell matrix adhesion and coordinate with 
growth factors (such as cell adhesion molecule and BMP). 
Third, enrichment of ‘E cM proteoglycans’ and ‘keratan 
sulfate biosynthesis’ underscored the critical role of glycos‑
aminoglycan modifications in establishing and maintaining 
a c H‑to‑osteoblast transition microenvironment. The term 
‘negative regulation of molecular function’ likely reflected the 
precise control of matrix degradation by protease inhibitors, 
such as Serpine2. Fourth, microenvironmental homeostasis 
mechanisms were highlighted by terms such as ‘hemostasis’ 
and ‘blood vessel development’ , indicating the coupled roles of 
angiogenesis, coagulation factors and the oxygen microenvi ‑
ronment in bone repair processes. Enrichment of the ‘apoptotic 
signaling pathway’ and ‘positive regulation of execution phase 
of apoptosis’ likely reflected the contribution of programmed 
death of HTCs to the progression of ossification.
Safranin O/Fast Green staining of callus tissues harvested 
from the fracture sites at 10 and 21 days post‑fracture was 
performed (Fig. 2E). On day 10, the robust formation of carti‑
laginous calluses was observed in all groups. The extracellular 
matrix of HT cs, rich in proteoglycans, was intensely stained 
red by Safranin O, indicating that the cartilage tissue consti ‑
tuted the majority of the callus at this stage, with only a small 
proportion of gray‑blue‑stained osteogenic areas present. 
A marked increase in the number and proportion of tdTo ‑
mato+/OcN+ double‑positive cells indicative of c H‑derived 
osteoblasts was evident from the immunofluorescence images 
comparing fracture calli at day 10 and day 21 post‑fracture 
(Fig. 2E).
Oxygen availability facilitates the osteogenic differentiation 
of CHs via KDM6A. Given that K dM6A acts as an oxygen 
sensor to regulate cellular differentiation (22), the present 
study investigated how c H‑to‑osteoblast differentiation 
during endochondral ossification is altered under different 
oxygen levels. cHs derived from fx /wt and fx /fx mice were 
subjected to transdifferentiation induction. After 7 days of 
induction, Alcian blue staining ( Fig. 3A and B) revealed that 
the fx /wt‑normoxic group exhibited a significantly lower 
amount of acidic mucopolysaccharides than the fx/wt‑hypoxic 
group (P<0.05), while the fx /fx‑normoxic group showed a 
significant increase in acidic mucopolysaccharides compared 
with the fx /wt‑normoxic group (P<0.01). ALP staining 
(Fig. 3c and d) demonstrated that the number of ALP‑positive 
cells was markedly higher in the fx /wt‑normoxic group than 
in the fx /wt‑hypoxic group (P<0.001), whereas the number of 
ALP‑positive cells in the fx /fx‑normoxic group was signifi ‑
cantly lower than that in the fx /wt‑normoxic group (P<0.001). 
Alizarin red staining ( Fig. 3E and F) indicated an increased 
number of mineralized nodules in the fx /wt‑normoxic group 
compared with the fx/wt‑hypoxic group (P<0.05), whereas the 

=== PAGE 11 ===
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MO LEcULAR ME dIcINE  58:  203,  2026 11
fx/fx‑normoxic group had fewer mineralized nodules than the 
fx/wt‑normoxic group (P<0.05).
qPcR analysis of cH marker gene expression 3 days after 
induction (Fig. 3G) showed that the mRNA levels of col10a1, 
Acan and col2a1 were reduced in the fx/wt‑normoxic group 
compared with the fx/wt‑hypoxic group (P<0.05, P<0.01 and 
P<0.0001, respectively). By contrast, fx/fx‑normoxic mice 
exhibited increased expression of all three genes compared 
with fx/wt‑normoxic mice (P<0.05), with a particularly 
significant upregulation of col2a1 and Acan (P<0.0001). 
Furthermore, analysis of the relative mRNA levels of osteo ‑
genic differentiation‑related genes (Fig.  3H) revealed that 
Col1a1, Spp1 and Sparc were significantly upregulated in the 
fx/wt‑normoxic group compared with the fx/wt‑hypoxic group 
Figure 2. Differentiation of CDOPs into osteoblasts during endochondral ossification is regulated by the oxygen environment. (A) UMAP plot showing the 
distribution of cell subpopulations, with a pseudo‑time trajectory from cHs to osteoblasts/HTcs that included both fates 1 and 2. The trajectory plot shows the 
underlying graph structure as black lines. The white line indicates fate 1, representing the transdifferentiation path from c Hs through the transitional cd OP 
state to osteoblasts. The blue line indicates fate 2, depicting the differentiation path from cHs through pre‑HT cs to HTcs. White circles represent roots, gray 
circles indicate terminal fates (leaves) and black circles denote the branch points from which cells can diverge toward multiple fates. (B) Pseudotime expres ‑
sion plots for the top six genes, illustrating their dynamic changes along the differentiation trajectory. (C) Expression profiles of the top six genes across the 
different cell subpopulations. ( d) Bar plot of GO functional enrichment for the top 100 genes, colored by P‑value. (E) Representative Safranin O/Fast Green 
staining images of mouse tibial fracture callus at 10 and 21  days post‑fracture (scale bar, 200  µm), and immunofluorescence staining images showing OCN + 
and col2a1‑tdTomato+ cells (scale bars, 500 and 20 µm). For each timepoint, callus tissues were harvested from three independent mice (n=3 biologically 
independent animals per timepoint). O cN, osteocalcin; cdOP, chondrocyte‑derived osteoprogenitor; cH, chondrocyte; col2a1, collagen type II α1 chain; 
col3a1, collagen type  III α1 chain; c ol5a2, collagen type V α2 chain; E cM, extracellular matrix; GO, Gene Ontology; HT c, hypertrophic chondrocyte; 
Myo1b, myosin IB; Ncf2, neutrophil cytosolic factor 2; PI d, Pathway Interaction d atabase; Serpine2, serpin family E member 2; UMAP, uniform manifold 
approximation and projection.


=== PAGE 12 ===
RONG et al:  KdM6A AcTIVATES Wnt/β‑catenin IN TRANS dIFFERENTIATION12
(P<0.001, P<0.0001 and P<0.05, respectively). However, the 
expression levels of all three genes were markedly reduced in 
the fx/fx‑normoxic group compared with the fx/wt‑normoxic 
group (P<0.0001, P<0.0001 and P<0.05, respectively).
KDM6A promotes the differentiation of CHs into CDOPs by 
activating the Wnt signaling pathway. scRNA‑seq was also 
performed on chondral callus cell samples from fx /wt (WT) 
and fx /fx mice (FX), 10  days post‑fracture. The analysis 
focused on c Hs, pre‑HT cs, HT cs, cdOPs and osteoblasts 
(Fig. 4A). Violin plots of gene expression ( Fig. 4B) revealed 
that the mean expression levels of col2a1 in the WT group 
were lower than those in the FX group, whereas col10a1, 
RUNX2 and col1a1 were more highly expressed in the WT 
group than in the FX group. The expression levels of Acan 
and Bglap were similar in the two groups. The present study 
specifically focused on the CDOP subpopulation. The volcano 
plot of differentially expressed genes showed that osteogenic 
genes, including Col1a1, Sp7, RUNX2 and Spp1, were signifi‑
cantly upregulated in cdOPs of the WT group compared with 
those of the FX group ( Fig. 4c). GO analysis indicated that 
the upregulated genes were enriched in biological processes, 
such as ‘cell adhesion’ , ‘chondrocyte differentiation’ , ‘skeletal 
system development’ , ‘endochondral ossification’ and ‘osteo‑
blast differentiation’. Pathway analysis revealed that the ‘Wnt 
signaling pathway’ was the most prominent osteogenic pathway 
enriched in our dataset ( Fig. 4 d and E). GSEA ( Fig. 4F) 
indicated that the ‘Wnt signaling pathway’ was significantly 
enriched in the WT group (enrichment score, 0.276; P=0.0063; 
false discovery rate, 0), suggesting that global Wnt pathway 
activity was higher in WT cells.
CellChat analysis identified intercellular communication 
among the 16 clusters detected in callus samples on day 10 
post fracture, revealing extensive molecular interactions 
Figure 3. Oxygen availability facilitates the osteogenic differentiation of c Hs via lysine demethylase 6A. (A) Alcian blue staining of cells from each group 
after 7 days of induction (scale bar, 100 µm). (B) Quantitative analysis of Alcian blue staining in each group. ( c) ALP staining of cells from each group after 
7 days of induction (scale bar, 100 µm). (d) Quantitative analysis of ALP staining in each group. (E) Alizarin red staining of cells from each group after 7 days 
of induction (scale bar, 100 µm). (F) Quantitative analysis of Alizarin Red staining in each group. (G) Relative mRNA expression levels of c H marker genes 
in each group 3 days after induction. (H) Relative mRNA expression levels of osteogenic differentiation‑related genes in each group 3 days after induction. 
n=3, data derived from three independent experiments. P‑values were calculated using one‑way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc test. The values are 
presented as the mean ± S d. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001 and ****P<0.0001. Acan, aggrecan; ALP, alkaline phosphatase; c H, chondrocyte; c ol1a1, collagen 
type I α1 chain; col10a1, collagen type X α1 chain; col2a1, collagen type II α1 chain; fx, Kdm6a conditional knockout mice; Int den, integrated density; ns, 
not significant; Sparc, secreted protein acidic and cysteine rich; Spp1, secreted phosphoprotein 1; wt, wild‑type.

=== PAGE 13 ===
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MO LEcULAR ME dIcINE  58:  203,  2026 13
Figure 4. Lysine demethylase 6A promotes the differentiation of c Hs into cdOPs by activating the Wnt signaling pathway. (A) UMAP visualization of cH 
and osteoblast subpopulations in WT and FX groups. (B) Violin plots showing the average expression levels of marker genes across six samples. ( c) Volcano 
plot depicting upregulated genes in cdOPs between the WT and FX groups. ( d) Bubble plot of GO functional enrichment analysis of upregulated genes in 
cdOPs. (E) Line graph of gene set enrichment analysis enrichment scores for upregulated genes in cd OPs based on the GO database. (F) Line graph of 
enrichment scores from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway analysis showing upregulation of the Wnt pathway in cd OPs. (G) Network 
plot illustrating the number of interactions between any two cell groups. (H) Network plot displaying the interaction strength between any two cell groups. 
(I) Visualization of outgoing communication patterns of cell populations. (J)  Visualization of incoming communication patterns of cell populations, with 
Sankey diagrams showing relationships between cell clusters and patterns, as well as between pathways and patterns. (K) c hord diagram of Wnt signaling 
pathway interactions among c H subpopulations. (L) Hierarchical plot of Wnt signaling pathway interactions among c H subpopulations. Source (left) and 
target (right) cell populations are represented by colored circles. c onnecting lines indicate inferred Wnt ligand‑receptor interactions, with the line color 
corresponding to the source cell type and the line thickness proportional to the interaction probability/strength. The plot highlights cd OPs as a prominent 
source of Wnt signals within the chondro‑osteogenic lineage, with c Hs also contributing as a target. For each timepoint, callus tissues were harvested from 
three independent mice (n=3 biologically independent animals per timepoint). cd OP, chondrocyte‑derived osteoprogenitor; cH, chondrocyte; cTL, cytotoxic 
T lymphocyte; ES, enrichment score; FAM, fibroblastic reticular cell‑associated macrophage; FDR, false discovery rate; FX, Kdm6a conditional knockout 
mice; GO, Gene Ontology; HTc, hypertrophic chondrocyte; UMAP, uniform manifold approximation and projection; WT, wild‑type.


=== PAGE 14 ===
RONG et al:  KdM6A AcTIVATES Wnt/β‑catenin IN TRANS dIFFERENTIATION14
(Fig. 4G and H). Sankey plots showed how 13 sender cell 
populations (acting as signaling sources) coordinated with 
one another and with specific signaling pathways to drive 
communication, and how 12 receiver cell populations (acting 
as targets) coordinated to respond to incoming signals 
(Fig. 4I and J). Notably, cHs and cdOPs exhibited the highest 
frequency of intercellular interactions via the Wnt signaling 
pathway (Fig. 4K). Furthermore, the hierarchical plot (Fig. 4L) 
delineated the sending and receiving roles of different c H 
subsets within the Wnt signaling network, highlighting cdOPs 
as key signaling hubs.
KDM6A deficiency inhibits endochondral ossification under 
normoxic conditions by suppressing the Wnt/β‑catenin pathway 
through enhanced histone H3K27 methylation. Western blot 
analysis was performed to assess the histone methylation levels 
in cHs from fx /wt‑normoxic and fx/fx‑normoxic cells during 
transdifferentiation. H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 levels were 
normalized to those of total histone H3 (loading control) to 
quantify relative changes in these histone modifications inde ‑
pendently of total protein variation. As shown in Fig.  5A, the 
expression levels of H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 proteins were 
significantly higher in the fx /fx‑normoxic group than in the 
fx/wt‑normoxic group (P<0.001). chIP‑PcR (Fig. 5B) showed 
that enrichment of H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 at the Wnt3a 
promoter region was markedly increased in the fx/fx normoxic 
group compared with the fx /wt‑normoxic group. H3K27me3 
enrichment at the RUNX2 promoter was also higher in the 
fx/fx‑normoxic group than in the fx /wt‑normoxic group. 
Additionally, the protein expression levels of Wnt3a, β‑catenin 
and RUNX2 (Fig. 5c and d) were reduced in the fx/fx‑hypoxic 
group compared with the fx/wt‑hypoxic group (P<0.05). In addi‑
tion, the fx /wt‑normoxic group exhibited significantly higher 
expression levels of β‑catenin and RUNX2 compared with the 
fx/wt‑hypoxic group (P<0.001), while Wnt3a expression was also 
increased (P<0.01). By contrast, the expression levels of all three 
proteins were significantly decreased in fx /fx‑normoxic mice 
compared with fx/wt‑normoxic mice (P<0.001). differences in 
the mRNA expression levels of Wnt3a, β‑catenin and RUNX2 
(Fig. 5E) among the groups were in accordance with their 
respective protein expression patterns.
KDM6A deletion inhibits the transdifferentiation of CHs 
within the cartilage callus and delays fracture healing in 
mice. The present study subsequently investigated the impact 
of KdM6A deletion on fracture healing in mice. H&E staining 
(Fig. 6A) showed that at 10 days post‑fracture, both fx/wt and 
fx/fx mice exhibited calluses comprising a small amount of 
fibrous tissue and a large amount of cartilage tissue, with 
woven bone already formed in both groups. Notably, the 
fx/wt group displayed a greater amount of woven bone than 
the fx/fx group. By day 28 post‑fracture, the bone entered the 
remodeling phase; the woven bone in the fx/fx group appeared 
loose and irregular, whereas the fracture ends in the fx /wt 
group were smoother. In the fx /wt group, the woven bone 
transformed into lamellar bone, with a relatively continuous 
lamellar bone observed, suggesting a better degree of healing 
than in the fx/fx group.
At 28 days post‑fracture, in  vivo micro‑ cT scanning and 
three‑dimensional reconstruction (Fig. 6B) were performed 
to assess the morphology of the fracture ends. In the fx/wt 
group, a cortical bone bridge was formed, with no obvious 
peripheral callus observed, and partial recanalization of the 
medullary cavity was evident. By contrast, in the fx/fx group, 
a bone bridge was present, but the peripheral callus was not 
completely resorbed. Ex vivo micro‑cT standard scanning and 
three‑dimensional reconstruction (Fig. 6B) were performed 
on the harvested mouse tibiae to assess bone microarchi ‑
tecture at the fracture ends. Three‑dimensional views from 
the lateral, medial and dorsal aspects of the tibia, as well as 
two‑dimensional sagittal and coronal sections, revealed that 
both groups exhibited bony union at the fracture site, with 
varying degrees of endosteal and periosteal callus resorption. 
calli in the remodeling phase were observed in the outer 
cortex. On two‑dimensional sagittal and transverse sections, 
irregular block‑like intramedullary calluses were visible at the 
fracture ends, which were more pronounced in the fx/fx group. 
Quantitative analyses were conducted for BV/TV , BS/TV , 
Tb.N and Tb.Th within 1 mm of and below the fracture line 
(Fig. 6c). In the fx/fx group, both BV/TV and BS/TV were 
significantly higher than those in the fx/wt group (P<0.01), 
whereas Tb.N was also higher in the fx/fx group (P<0.05); no 
significant difference in Tb.Th was observed (P>0.05).
Immunofluorescence staining for OCN at the fracture callus 
at 10 and 21 days (Fig. 6d) was performed to assess the propor‑
tion of cH‑to‑osteoblast transdifferentiation. KdM6A deletion 
resulted in a significant reduction in transdifferentiation effi ‑
ciency on day 10 (Fig. 6E; P<0.01) and a further decrease by 
day 21 (Fig. 6G; P<0.001). Safranin O/Fast Green staining 
(Fig. 6F) on day 10 post‑fracture revealed active cartilage callus 
formation in both groups, with HTc‑rich matrix stained bright 
red (proteoglycan content) and cartilage predominating in the 
callus, while a few gray‑blue‑stained osteogenic regions were 
visible. The fx/wt group had a greater osteogenic area than the 
fx/fx group, and the latter had fewer gray‑blue regions than the 
former. At 21 days post‑fracture, the red‑stained cartilage area 
in the fx/wt group was decreased, indicating active ossifica ‑
tion, and the gray‑blue osteogenic area was increased; the red 
cartilage alternated with the loose gray‑blue woven bone. In the 
fx/fx group, abundant red cartilage regions persisted, and the 
gray‑blue woven bone was sparser, indicating a lower degree of 
ossification compared with the fx/wt group.
Discussion
The present study provided compelling evidence for a 
novel regulatory axis in fracture healing, in which the 
oxygen‑sensing histone demethylase K dM6A orchestrated 
cH‑to‑osteoblast transdifferentiation through epigenetic 
activation of the Wnt/β‑catenin pathway. Using an integrated 
approach combining scRNA‑seq, genetic lineage tracing and 
conditional gene knockout, the cellular dynamics and molec ‑
ular mechanisms underlying this critical bone repair process 
were delineated.
Single‑cell transcriptomic analysis of the fracture calli at 
different time points (days 10 and 21) revealed a previously 
unknown complexity in cH differentiation trajectories during 
endochondral ossification. A distinct population of CDOPs 
that represent a transitional state between HT cs and mature 
osteoblasts was identified. These CDOPs co‑expressed both 

=== PAGE 15 ===
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MO LEcULAR ME dIcINE  58:  203,  2026 15
chondrogenic (col2a1) and osteogenic (col1a1) markers, while 
exhibiting elevated expression of matrix remodeling genes, 
including Mmp13 and Spp1. This unique gene expression 
signature suggested that cdOPs serve an active role in modi‑
fying the extracellular environment to facilitate the transition 
from cartilage to bone. Pseudotime trajectory analysis further 
supported the existence of a direct differentiation pathway 
from c Hs to osteoblasts through this cd OP intermediate, 
challenging the traditional view that HTcs primarily undergo 
apoptosis during endochondral ossification (9‑12).
GO enrichment analysis of genes differentially expressed 
along the transdifferentiation trajectory provided crucial 
insights into the biological processes regulated by K dM6A. 
The significant enrichment of terms including ‘skeletal system 
development’ , ‘endochondral ossification’ and ‘ossification’ 
directly links the identified gene set to bone formation processes. 
Particularly noteworthy was the concurrent enrichment of 
‘EcM proteoglycans’ and ‘PI d INTEGRIN1 PATHWAY’ , 
indicating that K dM6A promoted a transcriptional program 
conducive to extensive extracellular matrix remodeling. This 
Figure 5. Lysine demethylase 6A deficiency inhibits endochondral ossification under normoxic conditions by suppressing the Wnt/ β‑catenin pathway 
through enhanced histone H3K27 methylation. (A) d ensitometric analysis of H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 protein bands. Representative western blot bands 
of H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 are shown. Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired t‑tests. The values are presented as the mean ± S d, ***P<0.001, 
****P<0.0001. (B) Gel electrophoresis of chromatin immunoprecipitation‑P cR showing differences in H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 enrichment at the Wnt3a, 
β‑catenin and RUNX2 promoter regions between the two groups. (c) densitometric analysis of the Wnt3a, β‑catenin and RUNX2 protein bands. P‑values were 
calculated using one‑way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc test. (d) Representative protein bands for Wnt3a, β‑catenin and RUNX2. (E) Relative mRNA 
expression levels of Wnt3a, β‑catenin and RUNX2 in each group after 3 days of induction. n=3, data derived from three independent experiments. P‑values were 
calculated using one‑way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc test. The values are presented as the mean ± Sd. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, ***P<0.001, ****P<0.0001. fx, 
Kdm6a conditional knockout mice; H3K27me2, histone H3 lysine 27 dimethylation; H3K27me3, histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation; RUNX2, Runt‑related 
transcription factor 2; wt, wild‑type.


=== PAGE 16 ===
RONG et al:  KdM6A AcTIVATES Wnt/β‑catenin IN TRANS dIFFERENTIATION16
finding is consistent with the recognized importance of matrix 
remodeling in endochondral ossification (7), and suggests that 
KdM6A‑mediated epigenetic regulation coordinates both cell 
fate determination and microenvironment modification. The 
co‑enrichment of ‘response to mechanical stimulus’ with integrin 
signaling pathways further implies that KdM6A may help inte‑
grate biophysical cues with biochemical signals during fracture 
healing, representing a sophisticated mechanism for regulating 
bone repair in response to complex environmental signals.
To investigate the regulatory role of the oxygen micro ‑
environment in endochondral ossification, an in vitro c H 
transdifferentiation model was established, and the effect of 
the oxygen environment on cH transdifferentiation was inves‑
tigated by changing the oxygen concentration in the culture. 
Mice with cartilage‑specific deletion of KDM6A were gener ‑
ated to explore the role of KdM6A in this process. cHs cultured 
under normoxic conditions exhibited greater osteogenic 
differentiation than those cultured under hypoxic conditions. 
The enhanced expression of osteogenesis‑related marker genes 
(col1a1, Spp1 and Sparc) and key Wnt/ β‑catenin pathway 
components (Wnt3a, β‑catenin and RUNX2) under normoxic 
conditions promoted c H‑to‑osteoblast transdifferentiation. 
conversely, the loss of KdM6A abrogated this pro‑osteogenic 
effect of normoxia, resulting in a significant reduction in the 
expression of these molecules and a consequent impairment 
of osteogenic differentiation, indicating the importance of 
KdM6A in oxygen‑mediated chondrogenic and osteogenic 
transdifferentiation. Single‑cell sequencing results indicated 
that the influence of KDM6A was primarily exerted during 
the early and middle stages of transdifferentiation, specifi ‑
cally from c Hs to the cd OP stage. Furthermore, K dM6A 
deficiency inhibited endochondral ossification under normoxic 
conditions by suppressing the Wnt/β‑catenin pathway through 
enhanced histone H3K27 methylation. To further determine 
Figure 6. Lysine demethylase 6A deletion inhibits the transdifferentiation of cHs within the cartilage callus and delays fracture healing in mice. (A) Representative 
H&E staining of the fracture callus from each group at 10 and 28 days post‑surgery (scale bar, 200 µm). (B) Micro‑cT scans and three‑dimensional reconstruc ‑
tion images at 28 days post‑fracture (scale bar, 10 mm) showing lateral, medial and dorsal views, trabecular bone within 1 mm above and below the fracture 
site, and two‑dimensional sagittal, coronal and transverse sections (scale bars, 5  and 2 mm). ( c) Statistical analyses of BV/TV, BS/TV, Tb.N and Tb.Th. 
n=6; six samples in each group were independently derived from 6 separate mice. Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired t‑tests. The values are 
presented as the mean  ± Sd. *P<0.05, **P<0.01. (D) OCN was marked with green fluorescence, CHs marked with tdTomato have inherent red fluorescence 
and the overlapping part in yellow indicates osteoblasts derived from CHs. Representative fluorescence images showing OCN + and c ol2a1 tdTomato+ cells 
(scale bar, 100 µm). (E) Quantification of transdifferentiation rates on day 10 post‑fracture. n=3, three samples in each group were independently derived from 
3 separate mice. Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired t‑tests. The values are presented as the mean ± Sd. **P<0.01. (F) Representative Safranin 
O/Fast Green staining of the fracture callus from each group at 10 and 21 days post‑surgery (scale bar, 200 µm). (G) Quantification of transdifferentiation rates 
at day 21 post‑fracture. For each timepoint, callus tissues were harvested from three independent mice (n=3 biologically independent animals per timepoint). 
Statistical analysis was performed using unpaired t‑tests. The values are presented as the mean ± S d. ***P<0.001. OcN, osteocalcin; BS/TV, trabecular bone 
surface area fraction; BV/TV, trabecular bone volume fraction; cHs, chondrocytes; col2a1, collagen type II α1 chain; fx, Kdm6a conditional knockout mice; 
ns, not significant; Tb.N, trabecular number; Tb.Th, trabecular thickness; TdT, tdTomato; wt, wild‑type.

=== PAGE 17 ===
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MO LEcULAR ME dIcINE  58:  203,  2026 17
the epigenetic target of K dM6A in the osteogenic differen ‑
tiation of cHs, western blotting was performed to detect the 
levels of H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 in cells. The levels of 
H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 were significantly increased in 
KdM6A knockout cells, indicating that K dM6A serves a 
role in removing H3K27me2 and me3 during chondrogenic 
transdifferentiation. c hIP‑PcR showed that K dM6A knock‑
down increased H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 levels in the 
Wnt3a promoter region, and H3K27me3 levels in the RUNX2 
promoter region. c ombined with the aforementioned experi ‑
ments, we hypothesized that oxygen might remove histone 
H3K27me2 and me3 methylation in the Wnt3a promoter region 
and H3K27me3 methylation in the RUNX2 promoter region 
by activating KdM6A to relieve the transcriptional repression 
of Wnt3a and RUNX2. Consistent with the present findings, 
it has been widely reported that K dM6A activates the Wnt 
signaling pathway through H3K27 demethylation (54,55). 
A previous study has shown that K dM6A directly removes 
H3K27me3 modifications in the promoter regions of OCN and 
RUNX2 to initiate osteogenic differentiation in bone marrow 
mesenchymal stem cells (30). KdM6A activates RUNX2 and 
OSX by removing H3K27me3 and promotes MS cs differ ‑
entiation into osteoblasts (31). K dM6A protein expression 
is increased during differentiation of M c3T3‑E1 cells and 
primary osteoblasts. GSK‑J1, a K dM6A inhibitor, increases 
H3K27me3 levels in the RUNX2 and osterix promoter regions 
in M c3T3‑E1 cells. This inhibitor reduces the expression 
levels of RUNX2 and Osterix, and ALP activity, indicating 
that KdM6A serves an important role in osteoblast differentia‑
tion by regulating the expression of RUNX2 and Osterix (56). 
These findings are similar to the present results and confirm 
the important influence of KDM6A on cell differentiation at 
the epigenetic level. Previous studies have demonstrated that 
KdM6A is closely associated with embryonic development 
and genomic stability. K dM6A contains a Jmj c domain 
and six tetratricopeptide repeat domains responsible for 
protein‑protein interactions. Its activity is highly dependent 
on the oxygen concentration. However, K dM6A functions 
independently of classical HIF‑1α (57,58). Unlike the HIF‑1α 
pathway, which is mainly responsible for cell hypoxic adap ‑
tation and survival  (16,17), KdM6A mediates a ‘directive’ 
pathway that directly determines cell fate (22). The two 
may act synergistically in hypoxic calli: HIF‑1 α provides 
the necessary metabolic basis and angiogenic conditions for 
regeneration, while the KdM6A‑Wnt axis directly initiates the 
osteogenic transformation program.
Finally, the present study demonstrated that oxygen 
promoted the transdifferentiation of c Hs into osteoblasts and 
facilitated fracture healing in mice by activating K dM6A, 
which upregulated the Wnt signaling pathway and RUNX2 
expression. In KDM6A‑deficient mice, woven bone forma ‑
tion was markedly reduced in the fractured callus on day 10 
post‑fracture. At 21 days after fracture, there were still more 
bright red cartilage areas in the callus of K dM6A‑knockout 
mice, and the gray‑blue woven bone was sparse. By 
day 28, during the bone remodeling phase, the callus in 
KdM6A‑knockout mice retained a loose woven bone struc ‑
ture, and the healing process was delayed. Micro‑ cT analysis 
further revealed that following K dM6A deletion, irregular, 
bulky intramedullary calli remained at the fracture site and 
healing was slowed. Immunofluorescence staining of tibial 
tissue sections was performed using an anti‑O cN antibody 
(green) to label osteoblasts. Since cHs were genetically labeled 
with tdTomato (red), cells exhibiting both green (O cN) and 
red (tdTomato) fluorescence were identified as CH‑derived 
osteoblasts. The proportion of these double‑positive cells rela‑
tive to all tdTomato+ cells was analyzed. KdM6A knockdown 
resulted in reduced transdifferentiation efficiency at both 10 
and 21 days, visually demonstrating the effect of K dM6A on 
callus cH differentiation.
The core finding of the present study was that KDM6A 
was the key molecular switch that coordinated cell fate 
switching. deletion of KdM6A inhibited the transcription of 
Wnt pathway genes by increasing H3K27me3 modification 
levels, thereby blocking the transformation trajectory from 
cHs to cdOPs and osteoblasts. Notably, cell communication 
analysis further suggested that K dM6A activity enhanced 
signal communication between various subsets of c Hs. This 
suggested that KdM6A not only determines cell fate through a 
cell‑autonomous mechanism but may also regulate the expres‑
sion of cytokines to coordinate the behavior of cell populations 
in the endochondral osteogenic microenvironment at a broader 
scale and ensure the orderly progression of fracture repair.
The present study has some limitations. The fracture model 
was limited to a single tibial fracture in mice, and data from 
studies on other species and calluses in humans are lacking. In 
addition, to avoid the side effects of Tam on the reproductive 
system and hormone secretion in female mice (59), only male 
mice were used for the experiment. The generalizability and 
clinical relevance of the present findings to different biological 
settings, such as different species, sex and fracture sites, need 
to be further explored. Although the present study confirmed 
that KdM6A activated the Wnt/ β‑catenin pathway, it did not 
verify the broader upstream regulatory inputs or alternative 
downstream effector pathways of K dM6A beyond this axis. 
KdM6A may also serve a role in endochondral osteogenesis 
via a non‑Wnt pathway. Future studies employing c hIP‑seq 
could map the genome‑wide binding sites of KdM6A, thereby 
clarifying its specific epigenetic regulation of Wnt target genes 
and potential effects on other pathways. The results of the 
cell experiments showed that a normoxic environment could 
promote the transdifferentiation of callus cHs into osteoblasts. 
Subsequent studies could include a hyperoxia group to further 
explore the effect of different oxygen concentrations on this 
process and screen the appropriate therapeutic concentra ‑
tion to promote transdifferentiation to provide a basis for 
clinical application. Oxygen‑sensitive KdM6A was shown to 
be a therapeutic target for fracture healing. In the future, its 
spatiotemporally specific regulatory network can be further 
analyzed, and the combination of biomaterials, gene editing 
and precision medicine technology can promote the efficient 
transformation of this mechanism into clinical applications. 
Examples include local oxygen therapy at the fracture site 
(biomaterial delivery of oxygen) and targeting of KdM6A.
Novel KdM6A agonists could be developed as bone regen‑
eration drugs. Their therapeutic potential may be enhanced 
through synergistic application with Wnt or BMP pathway 
modulators. Such a combination strategy could provide indi ‑
vidualized treatment for patients whose stem cell osteogenic 
capacity is compromised by underlying diseases, ultimately 


=== PAGE 18 ===
RONG et al:  KdM6A AcTIVATES Wnt/β‑catenin IN TRANS dIFFERENTIATION18
aiming to accelerate callus maturation and shorten the frac ‑
ture healing cycle. In summary, the present study revealed 
that endochondral ossification during fracture healing was a 
highly coordinated, multi‑step process in which c H‑derived 
cdOPs differentiated into functional osteoblasts to complete 
bone tissue reconstruction. Oxygen accelerated fracture 
healing by activating K dM6A, which removed H3K27me2 
and H3K27me3 methylation marks at the Wnt3a promoter and 
H3K27me3 at the RUNX2 promoter, thereby promoting c H 
differentiation into osteoblasts. These findings not only deepen 
the fundamental understanding of bone development and 
repair but also provide a theoretical basis for the development 
of epigenetics‑based bone tissue engineering technologies and 
for optimizing clinical strategies for fracture treatment. Future 
research will focus on developing small‑molecule compounds 
that specifically regulate KDM6A activity and explore their 
therapeutic potential in challenging bone injuries, such as 
osteoporotic fractures and nonunions.
Acknowledgements
Not applicable.
Funding
The present study was supported by the National Natural 
Science Foundation of c hina (grant no. 82205142), the Top 
Talent Support Program for Young and Middle‑Aged People 
of the Wuxi Health committee (grant no. HB 2023073), and 
the Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of 
Jiangsu Province (grant no. KYcX22_2062).
Availability of data and materials
The sequencing data generated in the present study may be 
found in the National c enter for Biotechnology Information 
database under BioProject accession number PRJNA1267459 
or at the following URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/biopro‑
ject/PRJNA1267459. The other data generated in the present 
study may be requested from the corresponding author.
Authors' contributions
YR and HYu contributed to experiment design, data analysis 
and manuscript writing. HYi provided resources and 
contributed to designing and performing experiments. SL 
contributed to experiment design and reviewing the bioinfor ‑
matics analysis. JW and ZS contributed to data analysis. X d, 
FB and T d contributed to data analysis, review and revision 
of the manuscript. GW and ZH contributed to conception and 
design, funding acquisition, and supervision. GW and ZH 
confirm the authenticity of all raw data. All authors have read 
and approved the final version of the manuscript.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All animal protocols were approved by the Animal care and Use 
Committee of Wuxi Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University 
of chinese Medicine (approval no. GZR2023032801; Wuxi, 
china).
Patient consent for publication
No applicable.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
References
 1.  GBD 2019 Fracture Collaborators: Global, regional, and 
national burden of bone fractures in 204 countries and territories, 
1990‑2019: A systematic analysis from the global burden of 
disease study. Lancet Healthy Longev 2: e580‑e592, 2021.
 2.  Wildemann B, Ignatius A, Leung F, Taitsman LA, Smith RM, 
Pesántez R, Stoddart MJ, Richards RG and Jupiter JB: Non‑union 
bone fractures. Nat Rev dis Primers 7: 57, 2021.
 3.  Noorlander‑Borgdorff MP, Şekercan A, Young‑Afat DA, 
Bouman  M, Botman  M and Giannakópoulos GF: Nationwide 
study on open tibial fractures in the Netherlands: Incidence, 
demographics and level of hospital care. Injury 55: 111487, 2024.
 4.  Zhang S, c hen L, Zhang c , Gong c , He X, Zhong H, Liu c , 
cao Z, c hen W, Lin N, et al : Osteoking exerts pro‑osteogenic 
and anti‑adipogenic effects in promoting bone fracture healing 
via EGF/EGFR/H dAc1/Wnt/ β‑catenin signaling. Int J Mol 
Med 55: 75, 2025.
 5.  claes L, Recknagel S and Ignatius A: Fracture healing under healthy 
and inflammatory conditions. Nat Rev Rheumatol 8: 133‑143, 2012.
 6.  Mathavan N, Singh A, Marques F c, Günther d , Kuhn GA, 
Wehrle E and Müller R: Spatial transcriptomics in bone mecha ‑
nomics: Exploring the mechanoregulation of fracture healing in 
the era of spatial omics. Sci Adv 11: eadp8496, 2025.
 7. dennis S c, Berkland c J, Bonewald LF and d etamore MS: 
Endochondral ossification for enhancing bone regeneration: 
converging native extracellular matrix biomaterials and develop‑
mental engineering in vivo. Tissue Eng Part B Rev 21: 247‑266, 2015.
 8.  Amizuka N, Hasegawa T, Oda K, Luiz de Freitas PH, Hoshi K, 
Li M and Ozawa H: Histology of epiphyseal cartilage calcifica ‑
tion and endochondral ossification. Front Biosci (Elite Ed) 4: 
2085‑2100, 2012.
 9. Aizawa T, Kokubun S and Tanaka Y: Apoptosis and proliferation 
of growth plate chondrocytes in rabbits. J Bone Joint Surg Br 79: 
483‑486, 1997.
10. Farnum cE and Wilsman NJ: Morphologic stages of the terminal 
hypertrophic chondrocyte of growth plate cartilage. Anat 
Rec 219: 221‑232, 1987.
11. Farnum c E and Wilsman NJ: c ondensation of hypertrophic 
chondrocytes at the chondro‑osseous junction of growth plate 
cartilage in Yucatan swine: relationship to long bone growth. Am 
J Anat 186: 346‑358, 1989.
12. Gibson G: Active role of chondrocyte apoptosis in endochondral 
ossification. Microsc Res Tech 43: 191‑204, 1998.
13. Yang L, Tsang KY, Tang H c, c han d and c heah KSE: 
Hypertrophic chondrocytes can become osteoblasts and osteo ‑
cytes in endochondral bone formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 111: 12097‑12102, 2014.
14. Giovannone d, Paul S, Schindler S, Arata c, Farmer dT, Patel P, 
Smeeton J and c rump JG: Programmed conversion of hyper ‑
trophic chondrocytes into osteoblasts and marrow adipocytes 
within zebrafish bones. Elife 8: e42736, 2019.
15. Im GI and Kim  TK: Overcoming current dilemma in cartilage 
regeneration: Will direct conversion provide a breakthrough? 
Tissue Eng Regen Med 17: 829‑834, 2020.
16. Stegen S, Laperre K, Eelen G, Rinaldi G, Fraisl P, Torrekens S, 
Van Looveren R, Loopmans S, Bultynck G, Vinckier S, et al : 
HIF‑1α metabolically controls collagen synthesis and modifica ‑
tion in chondrocytes. Nature 565: 511‑515, 2019.
17. Lu c, Saless N, Wang X, Sinha A, decker S, Kazakia G, Hou H, 
Williams B, Swartz HM, Hunt TK, et al : The role of oxygen 
during fracture healing. Bone 52: 220‑229, 2013.
18. Johnson RW, Sowder ME and Giaccia AJ: Hypoxia and bone 
metastatic disease. curr Osteoporos Rep 15: 231‑238, 2017.
19. An Y, Liu WJ, Xue P, Ma  Y, Zhang LQ, Zhu B, Qi M, Li LY, 
Zhang YJ, Wang QT and Lin Y: Autophagy promotes 
MSc‑mediated vascularization in cutaneous wound healing via 
regulation of VEGF secretion. Cell Death Dis 9: 58, 2018.

=== PAGE 19 ===
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MO LEcULAR ME dIcINE  58:  203,  2026 19
20. Schipani  E, Ryan HE, d idrickson S, Kobayashi  T, Knight  M 
and Johnson RS: Hypoxia in cartilage: HIF‑1alpha is essential 
for chondrocyte growth arrest and survival. Genes d ev 15: 
2865‑2876, 2001.
21. Provot S and Schipani E: Fetal growth plate: A developmental 
model of cellular adaptation to hypoxia. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1117: 
26‑39, 2007.
22. chakraborty AA, Laukka T, Myllykoski M, Ringel AE, Booker MA, 
Tolstorukov MY, Meng YJ, Meier SR, Jennings RB, creech AL, 
et al : Histone demethylase K dM6A directly senses oxygen to 
control chromatin and cell fate. Science 363: 1217‑1222, 2019.
23. Tamagawa  H, Fujii  M, Togasaki  K, Seino T, Kawasaki  S, 
Takano A, Toshimitsu K, Takahashi S, Ohta Y, Matano M, et al: 
Wnt‑deficient and hypoxic environment orchestrates squamous 
reprogramming of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. 
Nat Cell Biol 26: 1759‑1772, 2024.
24. Kong N, Zhang R, Wu G, Sui X, Wang J, Kim NY, Blake S, de d, 
Xie T, cao Y and Tao W: Intravesical delivery of KdM6A‑mRNA 
via mucoadhesive nanoparticles inhibits the metastasis of bladder 
cancer. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 119: e2112696119, 2022.
25. Wang JJ, Wang X, Xian YE, chen ZQ, Sun YP, Fu YW, Wu ZK, 
Li PX, Zhou ES and Yang ZT: The JMJ d3 histone demethylase 
inhibitor GSK ‑J1 ameliorates lipopolysaccharide ‑induced 
inflammation in a mastitis model. J Biol Chem 298: 102017, 2022.
26. Gao M, Li Y, c ao P, Liu H, c hen J and Kang S: Exploring the 
therapeutic potential of targeting polycomb repressive complex 2 
in lung cancer. Front Oncol 13: 1216289, 2023.
27. de Santa F, Totaro MG, Prosperini E, Notarbartolo S, Testa G 
and Natoli G: The histone H3 lysine‑27 demethylase Jmjd3 links 
inflammation to inhibition of polycomb‑mediated gene silencing. 
Cell 130: 1083‑1094, 2007.
28. Lee  S, Lee  JW and Lee  SK: UTX, a histone H3‑lysine 27 
demethylase, acts as a critical switch to activate the cardiac 
developmental program. dev cell 22: 25‑37, 2012.
29. Thieme S, Gyárfás T, Richter c, Özhan G, Fu J, Alexopoulou d, 
Muders MH, Michalk I, Jakob c , d ahl A, et al : The histone 
demethylase UTX regulates stem cell migration and hematopoi ‑
esis. Blood 121: 2462‑2473, 2013.
30. Hemming S, cakouros d, Isenmann S, c ooper L, Menicanin d , 
Zannettino  A and Gronthos S: EZH2 and K dM6A act as an 
epigenetic switch to regulate mesenchymal stem cell lineage 
specification. Stem Cells 32: 802‑815, 2014.
31. Pribadi  c, cakouros d , camp E, Anderson  P and Gronthos S: 
KdM6A‑mediated regulation of cranial frontal bone suture fusion 
in mice is sex dependent. Stem Cells Dev 32: 398‑409, 2023.
32. Wise JK, Sena K, Vranizan K, Pollock JF, Healy KE, Hughes WF, 
Sumner DR and Virdi  AS: Temporal gene expression profiling 
during rat femoral marrow ablation‑induced intramembranous 
bone regeneration. PLoS One 5: e12987, 2010.
33. Teng JW, Ji PF and Zhao ZG: MiR‑214‑3p inhibits β‑catenin 
signaling pathway leading to delayed fracture healing. Eur Rev 
Med Pharmacol Sci 22: 17‑24, 2018.
34. Zhou J, Liu HX, Li  SH, Gong  YS, Zhou  MW, Zhang JH and 
Zhu GY: Effects of human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem 
cells‑derived exosomes on fracture healing in rats through 
the Wnt signaling pathway. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 23: 
4954‑4960, 2019.
35. Yao cJ, Lv Y, Zhang cJ, Jin JX, Xu LH, Jiang J, Geng B, Li H, 
Xia YY and Wu M: MicroRNA‑185 inhibits the growth and 
proliferation of osteoblasts in fracture healing by targeting PTH 
gene through down‑regulating Wnt/ β‑catenin axis: In an animal 
experiment. Biochem Biophys Res commun 501: 55‑63, 2018.
36. Zhou H, Zhang L, chen Y, Zhu cH, chen FM and Li A: Research 
progress on the hedgehog signalling pathway in regulating bone 
formation and homeostasis. cell Prolif 55: e13162, 2022.
37. Minear S, Leucht  P, Jiang J, Liu B, Zeng A, Fuerer c , Nusse R 
and Helms JA: Wnt proteins promote bone regeneration. Sci 
Transl Med 2: 29ra30, 2010.
38. Suen PK, He YX, c how d HK, Huang L, Li c , Ke HZ, 
Ominsky  MS and Qin  L: Sclerostin monoclonal antibody 
enhanced bone fracture healing in an open osteotomy model in 
rats. J Orthop Res 32: 997‑1005, 2014.
39. Florio M, Gunasekaran K, Stolina M, Li X, Liu L, Tipton B, 
Salimi‑Moosavi H, Asuncion FJ, Li c, Sun B, et al: A bispecific 
antibody targeting sclerostin and d KK‑1 promotes bone mass 
accrual and fracture repair. Nat c ommun 7: 11505, 2016.
40. Jin H, Wang B, Li J, Xie W, Mao Q, Li S, dong F, Sun Y, Ke HZ, 
Ba bij P, et al : Anti‑ dKK1 antibody promotes bone fracture 
healing through activation of β‑catenin signaling. Bone 71: 
63‑75, 2015.
41. Houben A, Kostanova‑Poliakova d , Weissenböck M, Graf J, 
Teufel S, von der Mark K and Hartmann c : β‑catenin activity 
in late hypertrophic chondrocytes locally orchestrates osteoblas ‑
togenesis and osteoclastogenesis. d evelopment 143: 3826‑3838, 
2016.
42. Meng Y, Zhang T, Zheng R, ding S, Yang J, Liu R, Jiang Y and 
Jiang W: depletion of demethylase KdM6 enhances early neuro‑
ectoderm commitment of human PSCs. Front Cell Dev Biol 9: 
702462, 2021.
43. Kikuchi K, Haneda M, Hayashi S, Maeda T, Nakano N, 
Kuroda Y, Tsubosaka M, Kamenaga T, Fujita M, Ikuta K, et al : 
P21 deficiency exhibits delayed endochondral ossification during 
fracture healing. Bone 165: 116572, 2022.
44. catheline SE, Hoak d, chang M, Ketz JP, Hilton MJ, Zuscik MJ 
and Jonason JH: Chondrocyte‑specific RUNX2 overexpression 
accelerates post‑traumatic osteoarthritis progression in adult 
mice. J Bone Miner Res 34: 1676‑1689, 2019.
45. Gao H, Huang J, Wei Q and He  c: Advances in animal models 
for studying bone fracture healing. Bioengineering (Basel) 10: 
201, 2023.
46. Ramírez‑Salazar EG, Almeraya EV , López‑Perez TV , Patiño N, 
Salmeron J and Velázquez‑ cruz R: MicroRNA‑548‑3p 
overexpression inhibits proliferation, migration and inva ‑
sion in osteoblast‑like cells by targeting STAT1 and MAFB. 
J Biochem 168: 203‑211, 2020.
47. cheng Z, Li A, Tu cL, Maria cS, Szeto N, Herberger A, chen TH, 
Song F, Wang J, Liu X, et al: calcium‑sensing receptors in chon‑
drocytes and osteoblasts are required for callus maturation and 
fracture healing in mice. J Bone Miner Res 35: 143‑154, 2020.
48. Livak KJ and Schmittgen T d: Analysis of relative gene expres ‑
sion data using real‑time quantitative PcR and the 2(‑delta delta 
c(T)) method. Methods 25: 402‑408, 2001.
49. Peyrin F, d ong P, Pacureanu A and Langer M: Micro‑ and 
nano‑cT for the study of bone ultrastructure. c urr Osteoporos 
Rep 12: 465‑474, 2014.
50. Wang c , Brisson BK, Terajima M, Li Q, Hoxha K, 
Han B, Goldberg AM, Sherry Liu X, Marcolongo MS, 
Enomoto‑Iwamoto M, et al: Type III collagen is a key regulator 
of the collagen fibrillar structure and biomechanics of articular 
cartilage and meniscus. Matrix Biol 85‑86: 47‑67, 2020.
51. chen M, Zhu X, Zhang L and Zhao d : cOL5A2 is a prog ‑
nostic‑related biomarker and correlated with immune infiltrates 
in gastric cancer based on transcriptomics and single‑cell RNA 
sequencing. BMc Med Genomics 16: 220, 2023.
52. Wang L, c hen S, Zhang H, Wei G, Ma F, Zhang M, Zhang B, 
Yang S, c heng H, Yang R, et al : Serine protease inhibitor E2 
protects against cartilage tissue destruction and inflammation 
in osteoarthritis by targeting NF‑ κB signalling. Rheumatology 
(Oxford) 63: 3172‑3183, 2024.
53. chen YH, Xu NZ, Hong c, Li WQ, Zhang YQ, Yu XY, Huang YL 
and Zhou JY: Myo1b promotes tumor progression and angiogen‑
esis by inhibiting autophagic degradation of HIF‑1α in colorectal 
cancer. Cell Death Dis 13: 939, 2022.
54. Shi B, Li W, Song Y, Wang Z, Ju R, Ulman A, Hu J, Palomba F, 
Zhao Y, Le JP, et al: UTX condensation underlies its 
tumour‑suppressive activity. Nature 597: 726‑731, 2021.
55. Wen Y, chen X, Feng H, Wang X, Kang X, Zhao P, Zhao c  
and Wei Y: Kdm6a deficiency in microglia/macrophages epige ‑
netically silences Lcn2 expression and reduces photoreceptor 
dysfunction in diabetic retinopathy. Metabolism 136: 155293, 
2022.
56. Yang d , Okamura H, Teramachi J and Haneji T: Histone 
demethylase Utx regulates differentiation and mineralization in 
osteoblasts. J cell Biochem 116: 2628‑2636, 2015.
57. duplaquet L, Li Y, Booker MA, Xie Y, Olsen SN, Patel RA, 
Hong d, Hatton c, denize T, Walton E, et al: KdM6A epigeneti‑
cally regulates subtype plasticity in small cell lung cancer. Nat 
cell Biol 25: 1346‑1358, 2023.
58. Yang Y, chen c, Zuo Q, Lu H, Salman S, Lyu Y, Huang TYT, 
Wicks EE, Jackson W III, d atan E, et al : NARF is a 
hypoxia‑induced coactivator for O cT4‑mediated breast cancer 
stem cell specification. Sci Adv 8: eabo5000, 2022.
59. Li H, Liu Y, Wang Y, Zhao X and Qi  X: Hormone therapy for 
ovarian cancer: Emphasis on mechanisms and applications 
(Review). Oncol Rep 46: 223, 2021.
Copyright © 2026 Rong et al. This work is licensed under 
a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) 
License.

