
=== PAGE 1 ===
*For correspondence:
andrei.chagin@ki.se
Competing interests: The
authors declare that no
competing interests exist.
Funding: See page 27
Received: 16 January 2020
Accepted: 09 October 2020
Published: 16 October 2020
Reviewing editor: Xu Cao,
Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, United States
Copyright Xie et al. This article
is distributed under the terms of
the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use and
redistribution provided that the
original author and source are
credited.
Secondary ossification center induces and
protects growth plate structure
Meng Xie 1, Pavel Gol’din2, Anna Nele Herdina 1,3, Jordi Estefa 4,
Ekaterina V Medvedeva 5, Lei Li 1, Phillip T Newton 1,6, Svetlana Kotova 5,7,
Boris Shavkuta 5, Aditya Saxena 8, Lauren T Shumate 9, Brian D Metscher 10,
Karl Großschmidt 11, Shigeki Nishimori 9, Anastasia Akovantseva 12,
Anna P Usanova 5, Anastasiia D Kurenkova 5, Anoop Kumar 13,
Irene Linares Arregui 14, Paul Tafforeau 15, Kaj Fried 16, Mattias Carlstro¨ m1,
Andra´ s Simon 13, Christian Gasser 14, Henry M Kronenberg 9, Murat Bastepe 9,
Kimberly L Cooper 8, Peter Timashev 5,7,12,17, Sophie Sanchez 4,15,18,
Igor Adameyko 1,19, Anders Eriksson 20, Andrei S Chagin 1,5*
1Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden; 2Department of Evolutionary Morphology, Schmalhausen Institute of
Zoology of NAS of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine; 3Division of Anatomy, MIC, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 4Science for Life Laboratory and Uppsala
University, Subdepartment of Evolution and Development, Department of
Organismal Biology, Uppsala, Sweden; 5Institute for Regenerative Medicine,
Sechenov University, Moscow, Russian Federation; 6Department of Women’s and
Children’s Health, Karolinska Institutet and Astrid Lindgren Children’s Hospital,
Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, Sweden; 7Semenov Institute of Chemical
Physics, Moscow, Russian Federation; 8Division of Biological Sciences, University of
California San Diego, San Diego, United States; 9Endocrine Unit, Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
United States; 10Department of Theoretical Biology, University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria; 11Bone and Biomaterials Research, Center for Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 12Institute of Photonic Technologies,
Research center "Crystallography and Photonics", Moscow, Russian Federation;
13Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden; 14Department of Solid Mechanics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm, Sweden; 15European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Grenoble, France;
16Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden;
17Chemistry Department, Lomonosov Moscow State University, Leninskiye Gory 1-3,
Moscow, Russian Federation; 18Sorbonne Universite ´ – CR2P – MNHN, CNRS,
UPMC, Paris, France; 19Department of Neuroimmunology, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 20Department of Mechanics, KTH Royal Institute of
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
Abstract Growth plate and articular cartilage constitute a single anatomical entity early in
development but later separate into two distinct structures by the secondary ossification center
(SOC). The reason for such separation remains unknown. We found that evolutionarily SOC appears
in animals conquering the land - amniotes. Analysis of the ossification pattern in mammals with
specialized extremities (whales, bats, jerboa) revealed that SOC development correlates with the
extent of mechanical loads. Mathematical modeling revealed that SOC reduces mechanical stress
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 1 of 32
RESEARCH ARTICLE

=== PAGE 2 ===
within the growth plate. Functional experiments revealed the high vulnerability of hypertrophic
chondrocytes to mechanical stress and showed that SOC protects these cells from apoptosis
caused by extensive loading. Atomic force microscopy showed that hypertrophic chondrocytes are
the least mechanically stiff cells within the growth plate. Altogether, these findings suggest that
SOC has evolved to protect the hypertrophic chondrocytes from the high mechanical stress
encountered in the terrestrial environment.
Introduction
The mammalian skeleton articulates via articular cartilage, covering the ends of long bones, and
grows in length via epiphyseal cartilage, presented as tiny discs of chondrocytes referred to as
growth plates and located near the ends of long bones. The growth plate chondrocytes proliferate,
align in the longitudinal direction, and then undergo several-fold enlargement (hypertrophy). There-
after, the hypertrophic chondrocytes undergo apoptosis or trans-differentiation ( Yang et al., 2014 ),
leaving their calcified extracellular matrix as a scaffold on which invading blood vessels and osteo-
blasts form new bone tissue, a process known as endochondral bone formation. The process of
endochondral bone formation predominantly depends on chondrocyte hypertrophy, and is very con-
served throughout the evolution of vertebrates, being described for fin-rayed fish, lobe-finned fish,
stem tetrapods, and modern humans ( Hall, 2015 ; Sanchez et al., 2014 ; Sanchez et al., 2016 ).
In humans and most experimental models commonly employed to study bone growth (i.e., mice,
rats, and rabbits), the growth plate is separated from the articular cartilage by a bony fragment,
called a bony epiphysis, generated developmentally from a secondary ossification center (SOC). In
rodents and humans, this skeletal element forms during early postnatal development and splits the
initially contiguous cartilaginous element (the cartilaginous epiphysis) into distinct articular and
growth plate cartilage ( Hall, 2015 ) (see Figure 1—figure supplement 1A–B for orientation). Inter-
estingly, this spatial separation of articular and growth plate structures is not always required for
articulation or bone growth, since it is absent in several vertebrate taxa, such as stem tetrapods
(Sanchez et al., 2014 ; Sanchez et al., 2016 ), Chelonians, Crocodilians, and Urodeles (salamanders)
(Fro¨ bisch and Shubin, 2011 ; Haines, 1938 ) (see examples of salamander cartilage in Figure 1—fig-
ure supplement 1C–D ).
These observations raise the intriguing question as to why in many taxa including humans the car-
tilaginous epiphysis evolved into two functionally and spatially separated structures, one responsible
for skeletal articulation and the other one required for skeletal growth. Because both of these struc-
tures are involved in numerous pathologies (e.g., growth failure in children and osteoarthritis in
seniors), answering this question may be of considerable clinical significance.
Based on the anatomical comparison between the epiphyses of different tetrapods, Haines pro-
posed in 1942 that this separation evolved in evolution to improve the mechanical properties of the
cartilaginous joint ( Haines, 1942 ). An alternative hypothesis (based on mathematical modeling) sug-
gested that the SOC not precedes but is caused by mechanical stimulations ( Carter and Wong,
1988). Here we performed evolutionary and comparative analysis, mathematic modeling, physical
tests, and biological experiments, which altogether indicate that this separation evolved to protect
the growth plate from high mechanical forces associated with weight-bearing in a terrestrial
environment.
Results
Evolutionary analysis
Confirming previous observations ( Sanchez et al., 2014 ; Sanchez et al., 2016 ), 3D microanatomical
characterization of the 380-million-year-old lobe-finned fish Eusthenopteron revealed longitudinally-
oriented trabeculae within the shaft of their humeri ( Figure 1A ), strongly indicating that endochon-
dral ossification facilitates bone elongation in stem tetrapods in a manner similar to that in stem
amniotes (290 Mya) (e.g., Seymouria, Figure 1B ) and present-day mammals (e.g., red squirrel,
Figure 1C ).
Evolutionary analysis revealed that the SOC is not present in anamniotes and first appears in
amniotes, animals that relocate their entire lifecycle on land ( Figure 1D ). Among various groups of
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 2 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 3 ===
Figure 1. Evolutionary appearance of the SOC and its role in distributing octahedral stress. ( A–C) The proximal humeral metaphyses of Eusthenopteron
(A), Seymouria (B), and Sciurus vulgaris (red squirrel) ( C). The longitudinal trabeculae resulting from endochondral ossification at the base of the growth
plate in adults are shown in pink, while the transverse trabeculae appear green. The longitudinal trabeculae (l.t.) are designated marrow processes
invading the growth plate. ( D) Phylogeny tree, illustrating the major changes in the evolution of long-bone epiphyses. The black arrows indicate the
presence of a secondary calcified center (SC) or a secondary ossification center (SOC). (i) Estimated appearance of endochondral formation of long
bones based on the fossil record to date; (ii) Cartilaginous epiphyses in long-bones; (iii) Hypothetical presence of an ancestral SCs in sauropsids; (iv)
Figure 1 continued on next page
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 3 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 4 ===
synapsids, the SOC is present in all crown mammals, whereas some stem mammals have evolved a
SOC [i.e., Niassodon (Castanhinha et al., 2013 ; Figure 1D )] but others have not ( Chinsamy and
Abdala, 2008 ; Ray and Chinsamy, 2004 ). In sauropsids, which can be subdivided into two large
clades, Lepidosauria (lizards and Sphenodon) and Archosauria (crocodilians, chelonians, birds, and
non-avian dinosaurs), diversification of bone ossification is greater. Lepidosauria generally develops
a SOC (lizards) or calcified secondary center (SC, sphenodontids) ( Figure 1D ). However, Archosauria
does not develop such structures [( Haines, 1938 ), Figure 1D ] with the exception of few bones with
SOCs in some birds ( Figure 1E ). Instead, this clade develops bone marrow protrusions with calcified
or ossified walls that protrude into the epiphyseal cartilage and sequester the hypertrophic chondro-
cytes in between them ( Haines, 1938 ; Haines, 1942 ; Barreto et al., 1993 ; Horner et al., 2001 ).
These ossified protrusions are relatively small in chelonians and crocodilians and quite extended in
birds and non-avian dinosaurs ( Haines, 1938 ; Haines, 1942 ; Chinsamy and Abdala, 2008 ; Ray and
Chinsamy, 2004 and Figure 1E ). Although the weight-bearing bones of certain birds exhibit a SOC
together with such protrusions (e.g., the proximal epiphysis of the tibiotarsus in sparrow Figure 1E ),
most ossify without forming a SOC ( Horner et al., 2001 ).
It has to be emphasized that anamniotes spend their juvenile growth period in an aquatic environ-
ment, with amniotes being the first to translocate their entire life cycle on land. Such habitat change
may pose additional mechanical demands on the growing skeleton, which must be sufficiently rigid
to bear the body weight during a wide range of movements, yet flexible enough to allow bone elon-
gation. Accordingly, we next hypothesized that the development of the SOC or ossified protrusions
might be viewed as skeletal adaptations to the weight-bearing demands of the terrestrial environ-
ment and associated mechanical stresses posed on the epiphyseal cartilage.
Mathematical modeling
To explore the potential effects of the SOC and ossified protrusions on stress distribution within the
epiphyseal cartilage, we first employed mathematical modeling (i.e., finite element analysis, FEA)
based on a modified model developed by Carter and coworkers ( Carter and Wong, 1988 ;
Carter et al., 1998 ; Figure 1F , see the Materials and methods section for details). For description
of the local force effects in an equilibrium state, we evaluated the distributions within the model of
maximum compressive principal stress, octahedral stress, and hydrostatic stress. These scalar point-
wise stress state measures can, in essence, be seen as representing the local stress state by the dom-
inant pressure in any direction (maximum compressive principal stress), the deforming stress tending
to deform a spherical region into an ellipsoidal one (octahedral stress), and the uniform shape-pre-
serving pressure tending to change just the size of a sphere (hydrostatic stress). In this evaluation,
the shape-changing octahedral shear stress was provisionally assumed to be the most significant one
for chondrocytes according to Carter and Wong, 1988 .
First, the FEA showed that the SOC significantly enhances the stiffness of the entire epiphyseal
structure (note the level of deflection in Figure 1F ), thereby preventing severe distortion and conse-
quent instability during locomotion. This provides experimental support to the idea proposed by
Haines, 1942 . Furthermore, FEA revealed that the presence of either a SOC or ossified protrusions
reduces the extent of octahedral shear stress distribution (associated with either a vertical or an
angled load, the latter mimicking locomotion) within the region of the epiphyseal plate, particularly
where the hypertrophic chondrocytes are located ( Figure 1F , see other stresses in Figure 1—figure
Figure 1 continued
Hypothetical presence of an ancestral SOCs in synapsids. * indicates paraphyly within the group. ( E) A synchrotron scan of a juvenile sparrow
demonstrates the presence of SOC. 1, a virtual thin section of the proximal epiphysis. prox. ep., proximal epiphysis. ( F) Deformation and distribution of
octahedral stress from FEA simulation in different evolutionary taxa. Columns refer to (from left to right) ‘without SOC’ (representing i.e., fetal tetrapods
and urodeles), ‘with SOC’ (representing i.e., synapsids including mammal), ‘stem tetrapods’ (representing i.e., juvenile stem tetrapods, chelonians,
crocodilians), and archosaurs (representing i.e., birds and non-avian dinosaurs). For comparison of structural functionality, all situations used the same
basic geometry and materials. The small arrows indicate the direction of loading. The supra-physiological loading level (3 MPa) was modeled.
A hypertrophic zone free of bony elements is presented under each model for direct comparison.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 1:
Figure supplement 1. Development of articular and epiphyseal cartilage in rodents and salamanders.
Figure supplement 2. Deformation and distribution of comparison stress from FEA simulation in different evolutionary taxa.
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 4 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 5 ===
supplement 2 ). Interestingly, despite being similarly protective for epiphyseal chondrocytes, the
ossified protrusions do not improve the stiffness of the joint structure. Thus, our mathematical
modeling indicates that both of these skeletal adaptations reduce octahedral stress within the epiph-
yseal cartilage, plausibly representing alternative evolutionary strategies for achieving the same
goal.
Thus, in our subsequent analysis, we focused only on the SOC since it is most relevant to human
physiology.
Comparative analysis of animals with specialized extremities
Thus, evolutionary analysis suggests that the appearance of the SOC can be a skeletal adaptation to
the terrestrial environment, whereas mathematical modeling suggests that this adaptation may
evolve to protect the growth plate structure from mechanical stresses. To further explore the associ-
ation between mechanical demands and the extent of the SOC development, we selected a few
extant unrelated taxa with extremities subjected to different mechanical demands, specifically Chi-
roptera (bats), Dipodoidea (Jerboa [i.e., bipedal hopping rodents] ), and Cetaceans (whales).
Chiroptera
The newborn pups of Chiroptera must cling to their mother or to the roost from birth, utilizing for
this purpose only their feet, thumbs of the wing, and milk teeth, whereas other wing bones are not
used until 2–3 weeks of age, when the pups learn to fly ( Hughes et al., 1995 ; Powers et al., 1991 ;
Elangovan et al., 2007 ; Wang et al., 2014 ). We observed that in newborn bats the SOC develop-
ment in the legs and thumbs of wings is more advanced than in the rest of the wing bones
Figure 2. Comparative analysis in bats. ( A) microCT image of a 1–3 days-old bat Pipistrellus pipistrellus. (A1) foot, with arrows pointing to growth
plates, (A2) wing, with dashed blue lines outlining the areas of non-ossified cartilage. ( B–C) Ossification of the autopod ( B) and of the stylopod and
zeugopod (C) in seven bat species at birth. ( D–E) A generalized pattern of ossification of the autopod ( D) and stylopod and zeugopod ( E) of six bat
species combined ( Myotis lucifugus, Artibeus jamaicensis, Carollia perspicillata, Tadarida brasiliensis, Myotis austroriparius, and Myotis myotis).
The online version of this article includes the following video for figure 2:
Figure 2—video 1. 3D model based on microCT surface images of a 1–3 day-old Pipistrellus pipistrellus s.l. (common pipistrelle bat).
https://elifesciences.org/articles/55212#fig2video1
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 5 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 6 ===
(Figure 2A and Figure 2—video 1 ). This heterochrony, that is, a change in timing or rate of ontoge-
netic development, was particularly pronounced in autopods with heavily ossified feet and thumb,
but no SOC in other bones of the wing ( Figure 2B–C). It was apparent during ontogenesis and con-
sistent within the Chiroptera order (summary of six species with available ontogeny data is presented
in Figure 2D–E and primary data for all 13 species analyzed presented in Supplementary file 1 ). It
has to be admitted that despite a very clear pattern of heterochrony, there is a variation of ossifica-
tion among Chiroptera species, which likely reflects their varying foraging and roosting ecology,
behavior of juvenile bats, litter size, and lifespan ( Adams and Thibault, 2000 ; Hermanson and Wil-
kins, 2008 ; Koyabu and Son, 2014 ; Kunz and Hood, 2000 ; Racey and Entwistle, 2000 ).
Interestingly, SOCs in the feet and the thumbs of some bat species are well-developed even
before birth ( Supplementary file 1 ) and the pups of certain species ( Mops condylurus, Artibeus
jamaicensis, Megaloglossus woermani, and Rousettus celebensis ) are born with fully ossified feet of
adult size ( Adams and Thibault, 2000 ; Koyabu and Son, 2014 ) (see also Figure 2B for A. jamaicen-
sis). The appearance of SOC in embryonic feet and thumb suggests that a genetic program govern-
ing SOC development precedes the mechanical influence.
Jerboa
Next, we analyzed SOC development in the bipedal three-toed jerboa ( Jaculus jaculus ) in the family
of Dipodoidea rodents. These animals jump on their hindlimbs when adult but during the first 2–3
weeks of life they employ only forelimbs thereafter becoming quadrupedal and eventually bipedal
(Eilam and Shefer, 1997 ). The video-recording of gait pattern acquisition for two species, Jacuslus
jaculus and Jaculus orientalis, confirmed that jerboa employs only front limbs for crawling during the
first postnatal weeks ( Figure 3—videos 1 and 2). Analysis of the ossification pattern for Jacuslus jac-
ulus revealed that SOC formation in the front limbs significantly preceded the one in the hind limbs
(Figure 3A–R). It is interesting to point out that the development of the SOC also coincides with the
changes in gait pattern from crawling to walking in mice and rats ( Figure 1—figure supplement
1A–B). Whether the same situation applies to human remains to be investigated.
Thus, in both Chiroptera and jerboa, advanced ossification is observed in limbs subjected to
mechanical duties early in life, which is further strengthening an association between mechanical
demands and SOC development.
Cetaceans
If demand for SOC is mechanically related, we further reasoned that the absence of terrestrial-asso-
ciated loading conditions would release the evolutionary pressure on SOC and that it can be lost or
reduced with time. To test this assumption, we analyzed the cetaceans (whales) forelimbs
(Figure 4A ) whose mechanical demands highly differ in loadings and angles from their terrestrial
ancestors (Cooper et al., 2008 ). In early cetaceans from the Eocene epoch (56–33.9 Mya), the epiph-
yseal plates of the forelimbs are structurally similar to those of terrestrial mammals, as evident in
semi-aquatic Maiacetus inuus (Gingerich et al., 2009 ) and fully aquatic Dorudon atrox (Form, 2004 ),
where SOCs are present at the joints connecting carpal bones, metacarpal bones, and phalanges
(Figure 4B 1-2). However, in baleen whales (both extant and some extinct from Miocene epoch, 23–
5.3 Mya), there is a clear reduction of SOCs such as in the Balaenopteridae family where SOC is
reduced by up to 80% in metacarpals and phalanges ( Figure 4B 3) and the Balaenidae family where
SOC is reduced in distal radius and ulna and essentially absent in metacarpals phalanges ( Figure 4B
4).
Toothed whales from the Miocene to the present demonstrate more diverse patterns of second-
ary ossification. SOCs are not reduced in either Platanistidae or certain Delphinoidea ( Figure 4B 5),
whereas Iniidae (Amazon River dolphins) do not have distinct epiphyseal plates, but rather multiple
small SOCs covering 10–50% of the corresponding area ( Figure 4B 6). In Ziphiidae and the narwhal
Monodon monoceros (Delphinapteridae), SOCs are reduced in size by 5–10 times ( Figure 4B 7).
X-ray examination of another member of Delphinapteridae, the beluga whale Delphinapterus leucas ,
revealed only remnants of SOC in metacarpals and phalanges ( Figure 4D ). Finally, the most
advanced epiphyseal transformation is seen in the killer whale Orcinus orca (Delphinidae) ( Figure 4B
8; Cooper, 2009 ; Mellor et al., 2009 ) and the sperm whale Physeter catodon (Figure 4B 9 and 10),
in which the SOCs of the distal radius, ulna, and metacarpals are indistinct or even absent and a
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 6 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 7 ===
Figure 3. Comparative analysis in jerboa. ( A–P) Alcian blue and alizarin red staining of the femur ( A–D), humerus ( E–H), metatarsal ( I–L), and metacarpal
(M–P) of Jaculus jaculus (three-toed jerboa) at various postnatal ( P) time points. The dashed white lines outline the SOC. The gait pattern was derived
from our weekly observations (see Figure 3—videos 1 and 2). (Q–R) Ossification of the autopod ( Q) and stylopod and zeugopod ( R) of Jaculus jaculus
Figure 3 continued on next page
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 7 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 8 ===
fibrocartilaginous structure is formed in the carpal area ( Figure 4B 8–10). CT scan confirmed a com-
plete lack of the SOC in Orcinus orca (Figure 4E and Figure 4—video 1 ), which was further con-
firmed by radiograph ( Figure 4C ). Taken together, these observations suggest that the return of
cetaceans to the aquatic environment is associated with a gradual reduction in the size of SOC in a
few phylogenetic lineages, and even their complete loss in some species.
The observed striking consistency in unrelated taxa indicates a causative relationship between the
presence of the SOC and mechanical demands and considering mathematical predictions and evolu-
tionary analysis, further suggests that SOC protects the growth plate from mechanical demands.
Functional experiments with two model systems: the SOC protects
epiphyseal chondrocytes
To explore the function of the SOC experimentally, we first employed two ex vivo models: (i) appli-
cation of different loads to bones of similar size but with (mouse) or without (rat) a SOC and (ii) appli-
cation of identical pressure (load per area) to rat bones at different stages of development (before,
during, and after the formation of the SOC).
We first compared similar rodent tibiae, one with and one without a SOC. Analysis of develop-
ment pattern of mouse and rat bones revealed that the tibiae from 10-day-old rats and 30-day-old
mice are comparable in size and shape ( Figure 5—figure supplement 1A ), as well as in the mechan-
ical properties of the cartilage ( Figure 5—figure supplement 1B ). However, the rat tibia has not yet
developed a SOC (referred to here as the SOC- model), whereas the murine tibia does have a well-
developed SOC at this age (the SOC+ model) ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1A–B ). We applied
vertical or angled loads, which represent the loading conditions at rest or during locomotion, respec-
tively, with different forces to the SOC- and SOC+ models and first analyzed their physical proper-
ties. Consistent with the mathematical prediction, the SOC enhanced the stiffness and elasticity of
these bones in connection with both vertical and angled loads ( Figure 5—figure supplement 1C–J ).
Although confounding variables cannot be definitively excluded, the agreement between the mathe-
matical prediction and the physical tests further support our model that SOC provides additional
stiffness, while simultaneously reducing octahedral shear stress within the epiphyseal growth plate.
To address the protective effect of SOC on epiphyseal chondrocytes, we placed the bones
exposed previously to different loads into in vitro culture conditions for 48 hr to allow load-induced
cellular responses to manifest, using previously optimized culture conditions ( Chagin et al., 2010 ).
We then assessed the survival status of the epiphyseal chondrocytes using exposure to propidium
iodide (PI) during the end of the culture period (i.e., a part of live/death assay to visualize dead cells).
These experiments revealed that chondrocytes appeared to be highly sensitive to load, with 40%
dying upon application of a 1N-load in the SOC- model; whereas the presence of SOC allowed these
cells to withstand a load one order of magnitude higher ( Figure 5A–B and Figure 5—figure supple-
ment 2 ). The unfavorable effect of loading on epiphyseal chondrocytes in both the SOC- and SOC+
models was confirmed by the decreased expression of several typical chondrocyte markers, such as
Indian hedgehog (Ihh), parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) ( Figure 5—figure supplement
1K–L), and collagen type X (Col X) ( Figure 5—figure supplement 1N–O ).
To distinguish between mechanical damage and stress-induced activation of the self-elimination
apoptotic program, we performed the TUNEL assay on the loaded bones to detect fragmented
DNA, a hallmark of apoptotic nuclei. Epiphyseal chondrocytes in the SOC+ model become apopto-
tic in response to much higher loads as compared to the SOC- model ( Figure 5C–E , see also Fig-
ure 5—figure supplement 1M for baseline control). In addition, much higher loads were required
Figure 3 continued
(three-toed jerboa) at various postnatal stages. Data are means ± SD, representing inter-individual variation, one-way ANOVA. In ( Q–R), n = 2 jerboa
analyzed. ns, not significant.
The online version of this article includes the following video(s) for figure 3:
Figure 3—video 1. Development of a gait pattern of jerboa Jaculus jaculus.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/55212#fig3video1
Figure 3—video 2. Development of a gait pattern of jerboa Jaculus orientalis.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/55212#fig3video2
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 8 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 9 ===
Figure 4. Comparative analysis in whales. ( A) Forelimb bones of the minke whale Balaenoptera acutorostrata. (B) Comparative anatomy of bony and
cartilaginous epiphyses in the distal portion of the forelimbs of various cetacean whales: B1-B2 – early cetaceans; B3-B4 – baleen whales; B5-B10 –
toothed whales. ( B1) Maiacetus inuus, semi-aquatic from Eocene era (56–33.9 Mya), ( B2) Dorudon atrox, fully-aquatic from Eocene era ( B3) minke whale
Balaenoptera acutorostrata from Miocene era (23–5.3 Mya) ( B4) North Atlantic right whale Eubalaena glacialis, (B5) pilot whale Globicephala melas (B6)
Figure 4 continued on next page
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 9 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 10 ===
for the SOC+ model to activate caspase-3, a protease that executes apoptosis ( Figure 5F ). To fur-
ther explore the underlying mechanism, we checked the activity of the signaling pathway involving
the Yes-associated protein 1/Tafazzin (YAP/TAZ), which is well-known to be involved in mechano-
sensing ( Dupont et al., 2011 ) and can promote apoptosis via the tumor suppressor protein, p73
(Strano et al., 2001 ). Both the levels and nuclear translocation of the YAP ( Figure 5—figure supple-
ment 3A and Figure 9—figure supplement 1K–L ) and p73 proteins ( Figure 5—figure supplement
3B) were enhanced by loading, with their overlapping distribution pattern further confirming the
activation of this signaling pathway ( Figure 5—figure supplement 3C ). Thus, caspase-dependent
apoptosis, likely via the YAP-p73 pathway, appears to be triggered in epiphyseal chondrocytes by
mechanical loads with a SOC providing substantial protection.
We also noticed that cell death was most extensive in the hypertrophic zone ( Figure 6A–D ),
where the levels of active caspase-3, YAP, and p73 were also increased to a greater extent in the
hypertrophic zone than in the resting/proliferative zone ( Figure 6E–H and Figure 6—figure supple-
ment 1A–D ). In SOC- bones hypertrophic chondrocytes died in response to a load as low as 0.2N
(Figure 6I ), whereas in the SOC+ bones this phenomenon occurred only with loads of 3–5N
(Figure 6A–D). Within this loading range, no effect on chondrocyte proliferation was observed ( Fig-
ure 6—figure supplement 1E–F ), suggesting that loading affects particularly the hypertrophic
chondrocytes.
Despite the agreement with the mathematical predictions, confounding variables cannot be
definitively excluded in this SOC ± model. To further strengthen this line of experimental evidence,
we compared the effect of the same pressure (load per cross-sectional area) on rat tibiae before,
during, and after the formation of SOC. The tibia was isolated from rats of the same litter at 5, 8, 12,
15, and 22 days of age and then measured in order to apply a load (0.2–0.65N) that generated a
pressure of 0.023 MPa per cross-sectional area. We found that a pressure identical to that which led
to the death of chondrocytes before the formation of the SOC did not affect the survival of these
cells after this formation ( Figure 7A–D ). In addition, hypertrophic chondrocytes were proved to be
particularly vulnerable to this effect of pressure ( Figure 6E ). The percentage of the hypertrophic
chondrocytes that died and the size of the SOC were negatively correlated ( Figure 7F–G).
Thus, both these ex vivo models suggest that the SOC protects the growth plate chondrocytes
from mechanical stress, the effect particularly pronounced in the hypertrophic cell population, which
renders these cells able to withstand approximately twenty-five-fold greater load when a SOC is
present (comparing 0.2 N to 5N). In combination with mathematical modeling (compare the two left
columns in Figure 1F ), these findings indicate that the SOC protects chondrocytes and, especially,
hypertrophic chondrocytes from the deleterious effect of extensive mechanical stress.
Functional experiments with physiological systems: the SOC protects
epiphyseal chondrocytes
This highly effective protection by SOC observed in the ex vivo models prompted us to modulate
the size and maturity of the SOC in a series of in vivo experiments to compare the survival status of
the epiphyseal chondrocytes. We recently reported that an inhibitor of vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) receptor, axitinib ( Gerber et al., 1999 ), can delay development of the SOC within a
narrow developmental window, that is when axitinib is administrated at P18, but not P21 as analyzed
in transgenic mice ( Newton et al., 2019 ). Here similar inhibition on the size of SOC was observed in
wild-type mice ( Figure 8A–B). The mice in which the development of the SOC was delayed showed
Figure 4 continued
boto river dolphin Inia geoffrensis, (B7) narwhal Monodon monoceros, (B8) killer whale Orcinus orca, (B9) juvenile and ( B10) subadult sperm whale
Physeter catodon. (C) Sample image of an adult killer whale Orcinus orca (same species as B8) with X-ray images of the highlighted areas (C1 and C2)
from the corresponding image on their left. ( D) Sample (left) and X-ray (right) images of an adult beluga whale Delphinapterus leucas. (D1) Micro-CT
reconstruction of the highlighted phalange joint. ( E) CT image of an adult killer whale Orcinus orca and a virtual sagittal section of the metacarpal II
demonstrating the absence of the SOC.
The online version of this article includes the following video for figure 4:
Figure 4—video 1. CT scan of the manus of a killer whale Orcinus orca.
https://elifesciences.org/articles/55212#fig4video1
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 10 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 11 ===
Figure 5. The SOC protects epiphyseal chondrocytes from apoptosis induced by mechanical stress. ( A–D) Quantification of propidium iodide- (PI) ( A–B)
and TUNEL- ( C–D) positive cells in the growth plates of the tibia with and without SOCs loaded vertically ( A, C) or at an angle ( B, D). (E–F)
Representative images and quantification of TUNEL staining (green) ( E) and cleaved caspase-3 staining (red) ( F) in the growth plates of loaded tibias
with and without SOCs. DAPI was used for counterstaining (blue). Data are means ± SD, two-tailed Student’s t-test. In ( A–F), n = 3. The control and
loaded tibia were from the same animal. VL, vertical load, AL, angled load. RZ and PZ, resting zone and proliferative zone combined, HZ, hypertrophic
zone. ‘tibia with SOC’ and ‘tibia without SOC’ in the figure refer to tibias from 30-day-old mice and 10-day-old rats, respectively (see Figure 5—figure
supplement 1A–B).
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. Establishing and characterizing SOC ± model in relation to stifness and cell death.
Figure supplement 2. Death of the growth plate chondrocytes upon various loading in the presence and absence of the SOC.
Figure supplement 3. YAP/p73 activation the growth plate chondrocytes upon loading.
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 11 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 12 ===
significantly higher levels of apoptosis in the hypertrophic zone than corresponding controls
(Figure 8C–D). Axitinib treatment until the same final time point (P27) or for the same duration (P21-
P30) was employed as controls in these experiments ( Figure 8A,C ). No significant effect of axitinib
on mechanical properties of epiphyseal cartilage was observed as assessed by nanoindentation
Figure 6. Hypertrophic cells are the most sensitive cell type in response to mechanical stress. ( A–D) Comparison of the extent of cell death between
resting+proliferative zones (RZ and PZ) and hypertrophic zone (HZ) of the vertically and angularly loaded growth plates with ( A, C) and without ( B, D)
SOCs as assessed by PI staining ( A–B) and TUNEL ( C–D). (E to H) Distribution of immunohistological staining along the longitudinal axis for cleaved
caspase-3 staining ( E–F) and YAP and p73 double staining ( G–H) of the vertically and angularly loaded tibia with ( E, G) and without ( F, H) SOCs. ( I)
Representative images and quantification of propidium iodide (PI) staining (upper panel) and cleaved caspase-3 staining (lower panel) in the growth
plates of vertically or angularly 0.2N loaded tibias without SOCs. The control and loaded tibia were from the same animal. DAPI was used for
counterstaining (blue) in ( I). Data are means ± SD, two-tailed Student’s t-test. In ( A–I), n = 3. ns, not significant. ‘tibia with SOC’ and ‘tibia without SOC’
refer to tibias from 30-day-old mice and 10-day-old rats, respectively (see Figure 5—figure supplement 1A–B ).
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 6:
Figure supplement 1. Distribution of YAP/p73 activation along longitudinal bone axis and the effect of loading on chondrocyte proliferation.
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 12 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 13 ===
(8.1 ± 1.7 kPa (mean ± SE, n = 6, control animals) and 10.5 ± 1.9 kPa (n = 7, axitinib-treated animals),
p=0.37, unpaired t- test; mice were treated with vehicle or axitinib from P21 till P30 and live tissue
sections were analyzed).
In a second model, we employed mice with limb-specific activation of the stimulatory G-protein
a-subunit (Gnas), which exhibit delayed SOC formation ( Prx-Cre:GnasR201H) (Karaca et al., 2018 ). To
block immediate elimination of dead hypertrophic chondrocytes by ingrowing blood vessels, we
inhibited angiogenesis in these mice and corresponding controls by injecting axitinib at a time-point
when it does not interfere with the formation of the SOC (P21-P30, Figure 8A ) but delays elimina-
tion of hypertrophic chondrocytes ( Newton et al., 2019 ). Analysis of these mice confirmed reduced
SOC size in mutant mice and revealed an elevated number of dead hypertrophic chondrocytes in
these mice ( Figure 8E–F ). It must be emphasized that in both these pharmacological and genetic
models, mice actively run and thereby expose their growth plates to the weight-associated loads,
but have decreased body mass (for axitinib-treated mice, 56.6 ± 11.2% of the DMSO-treated control
and for the Prx-Cre:GnasR201H mice, 80 ± 6.9% of the corresponding controls). Thus, the increase in
cell death observed may be an underestimation of what might occur in bones with an underdevel-
oped SOC under normal weight-bearing conditions.
Figure 7. SOC size is negatively correlated with load-induced chondrocyte death in rat tibia growth plate. ( A) Representative images of the distribution
of propidium iodide (PI)-positive cells in the growth plates of rat tibia with the same vertical pressure of 0.023 Mpa (equivalent to the load of 0.2N for
postnatal day 5 rat tibia). ( B) Representative images of safranin O and fast green staining of the corresponding rat tibia to illustrate the development of
SOC. (C–E) Quantification of PI-positive total growth plate chondrocytes ( C), SOC size ( D) and PI-positive hypertrophic chondrocytes ( E) in the loaded
rat tibia at different ages. ( F–G) Correlation analysis of PI-positive total growth plate chondrocytes ( F) or PI-positive hypertrophic chondrocytes ( G) with
SOC size. Semilog line of nonlinear regression curve fit was used (red line). During the end of the culture period, bones were incubated with PI, which
penetrates only into dead cells (red). DAPI (blue) counterstaining of all nucleus was done on the fixed tissue sections. RZ and PZ, resting zone and
proliferative zones, HZ, hypertrophic zone. Data are means ± SD, n = 6. Two independent experiments were performed with three animals per time
point per experiment. Each data point in ( F–G) represents one animal.
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 13 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 14 ===
Summarizing, both pharmacological and genetic manipulation of the SOC confirmed its protec-
tive effect on hypertrophic chondrocytes, which is in agreement with the results obtained from ex
vivo models and mathematical predictions.
Figure 8. Inhibition of the SOC size in vivo is associated with increased epiphyseal chondrocyte apoptosis. Size of the SOC was inhibited either
pharmacologically employing axitinib ( A–D) or genetically employing activation of Gnas (E, F). (A–B) Representative histology images of the tibia
epiphysis (A) and quantification of the SOC size ( B) of wild type mice injected with axitinib at various time periods. P refers to postnatal day. ( C–D)
Representative images ( C) and quantification of TUNEL staining (green) ( D) in the hypertrophic cells of the tibia growth plate of the axitinib injected
mice. (E–F) Quantification of SOC size ( E) and TUNEL staining ( F) of the hypertrophic cells in the growth plates of stopGnasR201H (Control) and Prx-Cre:
GnasR201H (Gnas-Tg) mice. DAPI was used for counterstaining (blue) in ( C). Data are means ± SD, two-tailed Student’s t-test. In ( A–F), n = 3. ns, not
significant.
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 14 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 15 ===
Mechanical properties of hypertrophic chondrocytes make them
vulnerable to the mechanical stress
In another mouse model examined, where the formation of the SOC is delayed substantially by
chondrocyte-specific ablation of the salt-induced kinase 3 ( Sik3) ( Col2a1-Cre:Sik3F/F mice)
(Sasagawa et al., 2012 ), we noticed increased death of the hypertrophic chondrocytes not through-
out the hypertrophic zone, but mostly at the sides of the growth plate ( Figure 9A–B). In this strain,
hypertrophy is slightly delayed and we thought this observation might reflect a phenomenon over-
looked in our previous experiments, that is, the higher load at the edges or its different distribution
during locomotion. To explore this further, we applied loading to our SOC ± model at an angle from
the lateral side and examined the distribution of the cell death along the medial-lateral axis within
the growth plate ( Figure 9C ). We noticed that chondrocytes on the side opposite to the loading
underwent more extensive cell death ( Figure 9D–E). This uneven distribution of cell death was also
reflected in the higher number of TUNEL-positive cells and levels of YAP at the side opposite to the
one where angled loading was applied ( Figure 9—figure supplement 1C,E,G,I ). Vertical loading
did not affect the medial-lateral distribution of cell death, thereby serving as a control ( Figure 9—
figure supplement 1A,B,D,F,H,J ).
This medial-lateral distribution of the cell death does not match the distribution of the octahedral
stress, since upon angled loading this stress is low at the sides ( Figure 1F ). However, the distribution
of the highest compressive principal stress and hydrostatic stress upon angled loading ( Figure 1—
figure supplement 2 , see also Figure 9F and Figure 9—figure supplement 1M for physiological
loading range) matches well with the observed distribution of cell death along the medial-lateral
axis. Hydrostatic stress can be excluded since it increases upon vertical loading in the central part
and at edges, and therefore does not match the distribution of cell death upon vertical load ( Fig-
ure 1—figure supplement 2 , Figure 9—figure supplement 1M ). Thus, we concluded that direc-
tional compressive (principle) stress appears to be the one that overlaps well with the spatial
distribution of cell death under various loadings, and is likely, together with octahedral stress, harm-
ful for hypertrophic chondrocytes. Vulnerability to compressive stress suggests that hypertrophic
chondrocytes have a very low Young’s modulus (i.e., the ratio of stress to strain). To check this
directly, we utilized atomic force microscopy (AFM) to measure cell stiffness in live tissue sections as
described ( Xu et al., 2016 ). According to the mathematical prediction, we found that hypertrophic
chondrocytes were only approximately 25% as stiff as the columnar chondrocytes from which they
are derived ( Figure 9G–H).
Therefore, it seems plausible that this relatively low stiffness of hypertrophic chondrocytes, in
combination with their large size, render them particularly vulnerable to mechanical loading.
The involvement of mechanical versus genetic factors in the
development of the SOC
As mentioned in the introduction, many investigators presently believe that the formation of the
SOC is stimulated by mechanical factors ( Carter and Wong, 1988 ; Chagin et al., 2010 ; Klein-
Nulend et al., 1986 ; Stevens et al., 1999 ; Sundaramurthy and Mao, 2006 ; Wong and Carter,
1990). On the other hand, the observation that the thumb and fingers on the same wing of Chirop-
tera ossify at different times in utero ( Figure 2 ) indicates that genetic factors may play a more impor-
tant role in this formation. To explore this proposal, we examined the effects of unloading during
limb development in rats and characterized ossification in a newt species during its terrestrial stage
of growth.
On postnatal day 10, the hindlimbs of rats were unloaded either by resection of the sciatic nerve
or fixation with kinesiology tape (which resembles fixation with a cast but is lighter and easier to
change daily). Analysis at 23 days of age revealed that neither of these forms of unloading had
affected the size of the SOC ( Figure 10A–D,F–I), although in both cases bone mass was reduced
dramatically ( Figure 10E,J ). The inability of the animals to use their nerve-resected leg was con-
firmed by testing footprint behavior ( de Medinaceli et al., 1982 ; Figure 10—figure supplement 1 )
and this leg was also insensitive to pricking with a needle (video-recordings made every 3–4 days are
available upon request). The inability to use the taped leg was also documented by video-recording
every 3–4 days (available upon request).
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 15 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 16 ===
Figure 9. Low stiffness of hypertrophic chondrocytes renders them sensitive to mechanical stress. ( A) Quantification of the SOC size of postnatal day 28
Sik3F/F (Control) and Col2a1-Cre:Sik3F/F (Sik3-cKO) mice. ( B) Representative images and quantification of TUNEL staining (green) between the lateral
and middle parts of Sik3-cKO mice. DAPI was used for counterstaining (blue). HZ, hypertrophic zone. In ( A–B), data are means ± SD, two-tailed
Student’s t-test, n = 3 for ‘Control’ and n = 5 animals for ‘Sik3-cKO’ whereas each dot represents one histological section analyzed. ( C) Schematic
illustration of a section plan and loading directions in relation to the quantitative analysis of cell death distribution in the lateral-medial direction
Figure 9 continued on next page
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 16 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 17 ===
These experiments indicate that the development of the SOC is primarily under genetic control.
To obtain further support for this conclusion, we analyzed the epiphysis in the salamander Notoph-
thalmus viridescens , an anamniote that do not normally develop a SOC. However, these animals can
be raised under terrestrial conditions for several months. Therefore, we raised the newt Notophthal-
mus viridescens first under aquatic conditions, thereafter under terrestrial conditions (the eft stage,
characterized by much slower growth than during the aquatic stages [ Hurlbert, 1969 ]) and then
under aquatic conditions again. No SOC was formed during terrestrial growth ( Figure 10—figure
supplement 2A ), although calcification of cartilage during this period could be detected by Von
Kossa staining ( Figure 10—figure supplement 2A , middle panel). The numbers of apoptotic ( Fig-
ure 10—figure supplement 2B ) and proliferating chondrocytes ( Figure 10—figure supplement 2C )
were not dramatically different under aquatic and terrestrial conditions.
Altogether, these observations indicate that development of the SOC is governed primarily by
genetic mechanisms designed to meet future mechanical demands, which aligns well with the evolu-
tionary and zoological observations.
Discussion
We show here that the SOC protects hypertrophic chondrocytes from mechanical stress and likely
appeared in evolution in association with this function. We found that hypertrophic chondrocytes are
characterized by very low mechanical stiffness and high vulnerability to loading. It is likely that their
low mechanical stiffness in combination with the large size makes them vulnerable to various
mechanical stresses, including the octahedral and principle compressive stresses. These mechanical
vulnerabilities may be intrinsic to the process of chondrocyte hypertrophy per se, which is character-
ized by an enormous and rapid increase in the cellular volume, that is, twentyfold within 12 hr
(Cooper et al., 2013 ). At the same time, chondrocyte hypertrophy is a key part of the process of
endochondral bone formation, not only contributing 59% of longitudinal growth (73% if the corre-
sponding extracellular matrix is taken into account [ Breur et al., 1994 ; Wilsman et al., 1996 ]), but
also coupling cartilage resorption to the formation of the underlying bone tissue (e.g., via secretion
of Ihh and VEGF, as well as matrix calcification) ( Kozhemyakina et al., 2015 ). The growth of long
bones via hypertrophic intermediates (i.e. endochondral bone formation) has been evolutionarily
conserved for at least 400 ± 20 Mya ( Sanchez et al., 2014 ; Sanchez et al., 2016 ) and it seems plau-
sible that early in evolution when growth occurred in the aquatic environment, no specific mechani-
cal demands were posed on the hypertrophic chondrocytes due to compensation of body mass/
ground reaction force by buoyant force. However, the transition to a fully terrestrial environment,
unequivocally coupled with the loss of the buoyant force, places new mechanical demands on the
growing skeleton, such as a need to withstand the body mass, and required additional adaptations
of the skeleton.
The observation that longitudinal growth is sensitive to mechanical loads was documented almost
two centuries ago and formulated during the period of 1862–1897 as the Hueter-Volkmann law,
which states that ‘ increased mechanical compression reduces longitudinal bone growth while
reduced mechanical loading increases it ’ (Mehlman et al., 1997 ). This law was confirmed by numer-
ous subsequent studies. For example, Matsuda et al., 1986 revealed that the growth of the tarso-
metatarsus of roosters was delayed when exposed to a strenuous exercise. This observation was
Figure 9 continued
presented in ( D–E). The growth plate is divided into three equal parts, (left, middle, and right) in relationship to the angle at which the load is applied
(green or red arrows). ( D–E) Quantification of propidium iodide (PI)-positive chondrocytes in the resting and proliferative zones and hypertrophic zone
of tibias with ( D) and without ( E) SOCs subjected to an angled load (AL, green arrow, always applied from the right). Data are means ± SD, one-way
ANOVA. **, p<0.001 and ***, p<0.0001 in comparison with the left portion. ns, not significant. The black and white asterisks indicate the significance for
the resting and proliferative and hypertrophic zones, respectively. ( F) Principal compressive stress from FEA modeling with physiological loading level.
The small arrows indicate the direction of loading. The two-headed curved arrows indicate areas for comparison. ( G) Typical force curves for
hypertrophic and proliferating chondrocytes obtained by atomic force microscopy. ( H) Comparison of the elastic moduli of hypertrophic and
proliferating chondrocytes.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 9:
Figure supplement 1. The lateral-medial distribution of cell death upon angular loading.
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 17 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 18 ===
Figure 10. Unloading of the hindlimbs in growing rats by either sciatic nerve resection or by tape restriction. Sciatic nerve resection ( A–E) or leg
restriction with a kinesiology tape ( F–J) was done at 10 days of age and both hindlimbs (manipulated and intact) were analyzed at day 23. For ( A–E)
sham-operated littermates were used as a control (only right hindlimb was utilized), whereas for ( F–J) unmanipulated littermates were used as a control
(only right hindlimb was utilized). ( A–C, F–H) Representative Safranin O and Fast Green stained images of the knee joint. Black dash lines outline the
SOC and solid lines outline the epiphysis area in A and F. Quantification of SOC size (normalized to total epiphysis size) ( D, I) and bone mass (within
the primary spongiosa region) ( E, J). Bars are means ±95% confidential interval and every dot represent an individual animal, two-tailed Student’s t-test.
ns, not significant.
The online version of this article includes the following figure supplement(s) for figure 10:
Figure supplement 1. Footprint analysis revealed a clear difference between the right hindlimb of the sciatic nerve-resected and the sham-operated
rats.
Figure supplement 2. Cartilage calcification but absence of the SOC formation in the newt growing on land.
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 18 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 19 ===
further extended by Reich et al., 2005 , who showed that chicks freely running with backpacks
loaded with 10% of their body mass experience growth retardation associated with increased
resorption of the epiphyseal cartilage. Kiiskinen, 1977 showed that the longitudinal growth of the
femur of young mice was retarded after several weeks of intensive training. Our data suggest that
such a sensitivity of the growing bones to excessive load is due to the mechanical properties of
hypertrophic chondrocytes and their vulnerability to mechanical stresses. It is likely that the cell
death observed in our ex vivo and in vivo experiments is rather a far extreme manifestation of the
cellular stress experienced by hypertrophic chondrocytes. The lower levels of cellular stress might
have lesserbut yet negative impact on the hypertrophy process, such as decreased production of
extracellular matrix and signaling proteins, including the observed reduction in Ihh, PTHrP, and ColX
expression. Supporting, decreased expression of ColX was observed in the chicks with backpacks
(Reich et al., 2005 ).
Locomotion is thought to impose the most frequent and severe loads on limb bones in terrestrial
tetrapods ( Biewener, 1990 ; Butcher et al., 2008 ). In children, normal gait pattern generates peak
loads of four to six fold of the body weight on the femur ( Burdett, 1982 ; Yadav et al., 2016 ). Such
loads would be expected to be even higher during intensive physical activity, like sprinting or jump-
ing ( Burdett, 1982 ; Ozgu¨ ven and Berme, 1988 ; Perttunen et al., 2000 ). Thus, the load of 0.2N
used in the present study is within the physiological range for animals with 20-gram body weight
and would impair hypertrophic chondrocytes if they are not protected. Therefore, it is plausible to
assume that if mice would not develop the SOC, hypertrophy of their chondrocytes would be nega-
tively impacted during locomotion, which is in line with our pharmacological and genetic manipula-
tions where mice with under-developed SOC display increased death of hypertrophic chondrocytes.
At the same time, our data show that the SOC provides very effective protection, increasing with-
standing loads up to twenty-five-fold and likely allowing hypertrophic chondrocytes to bear the cor-
responding body weight under various locomotion modalities, including sprinting and jumping.
However, in absolute numbers, the loads in elephants and mice look far beyond any compensa-
tion achievable by the SOC. How does it work? Considering species with various body masses along
the phylogenetic tree, it was first noted by Galileo Galilei ( Galile, 1974 ) that the skeletal elements
become more robust relative to the body mass (BM) as the latter increases. The relation of the skele-
tal elements to BM is allometric (i.e. adaptive) and is generally described by the power law equation
y = kx a, where k represents coefficient and a represents scaling factor. The highest correlation has
been shown between stylopodial (femur or humerus) diameter (D) and body mass ( Campione and
Evans, 2012 ). However, the exact scaling factor varies among studies, depending on the type of
species and taxa utilized, weight-range selection, number of outliers, statistical strategy, sample
size, etc. For example, for ungulates, this relationship is calculated as D=BM 0.366 (Anderson et al.,
1985), whereas for insectivores+rodents it is D=BM 0.3944 (Bou et al., 1987 ). The most comprehen-
sive analysis of quadrupedal terrestrial tetrapods (including both mammals and reptiles) resulted in
the equation D = 1.26*(BM) 0.364 (Campione and Evans, 2012 ). This allometric increase in bone
diameter substantially reduces the pressure (load per area) on the growth plate with increased bone
mass. For example, due to this allometry, the increase in body size by thousandfold elevates the
pressure on the growth plate by 4.3–6.6 fold (depending on which scaling factor from above is
employed). Thus, allometric scaling of the skeleton compensates for most of the mechanical stress
associated with increased body mass in terrestrial tetrapods. However, this compensation is not
complete and pressure on the growth plate gradually increases for heavier animals. Why this com-
pensation is not complete is currently unclear but may be coupled to high energy demands or
unbearable skeletal mass required for compensation exclusively via skeletal allometry. Indeed, sim-
ple calculations show that complete pressure compensation on the skeleton can be achieved with
the scaling factor 0.5 (i.e., D=BM 0.5), which would result in 3.4-fold increase in diameter of every
weight-bearing skeletal structure of a 10 kg animal, such as a dog. Various alternative adaptations
are employed by nature to allow the skeleton to withstand the increasing body mass and preserve
the bone safety factor (the ratio of failure load to functional load), which is surprisingly stable from
a mouse to an elephant and ranging from two to four ( Biewener, 1990 ). The most significant adap-
tations include musculoskeletal composition, postures, and gait patterns ( Biewener, 1990 ; Biew-
ener, 1989 ). These adaptations, thought to evolve for the preservation of the skeletal safety factor,
may unequivocally provide additional protection to the growth plate structure.
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 19 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 20 ===
These various adaptations need to be considered from the evolutionary perspective, where vari-
ous traits can evolve independently, develop in parallel or converge. With few sub-specialized
exceptions, the entire Mammalia class can be characterized by the development of the SOC. In con-
trast, within Sauropsida clade, which is subdivided into two clades, Lepidosauria and Archosauria,
limbed lepidosaurs (lizards and Sphenodon) exhibit a SOC, whereas Archosauria (crocodilians, chelo-
nians, birds, and dinosaurs) exhibits ossified protrusions of bone marrow into epiphyseal cartilage
(Haines, 1938 ; Haines, 1942 ; Barreto et al., 1993 ; Horner et al., 2001 ; Figure 1E ). These protru-
sions are well-developed with calcified or ossified walls and penetrating deep into the epiphyseal
cartilage, sequestering hypertrophic chondrocytes in between them in non-avian dinosaurs and
birds, but very rudimental in chelonians and crocodilians ( Haines, 1938 ; Haines, 1942 ;
Barreto et al., 1993 ; Horner et al., 2001 ). According to our mathematical modeling, these
extended protrusions are more efficient in protecting the zone of hypertrophic chondrocytes,
whereas the SOC also reduces the deflection of the joint during locomotion ( Figure 1F ), which
would facilitate more efficient transmission of the ground reaction force vector toward the body
movement. Whether this difference has an evolutionary advantage remains to be explored, but the
observation that extant birds develop SOCs only in their weight-bearing long bones ( Wata-
nabe, 2018 ) might suggest that improving the mechanical properties of the cartilaginous joint has
an additional evolutionary advantage. Thus, it is plausible that the appearance of the SOC in weight-
bearing long bones of birds represents an evolutionary convergence. At the same time, the appear-
ance of the SOC in Mammalia and Lepidosauria and ossified protrusions in Archosauria can be con-
sidered as alternative parallel traits. Interestingly, recent genome sequencing of tuatara, the most
ancient extant creature of Lepidosauria, revealed remarkable similarities in genome architecture with
mammalian lineages ( Gemmell et al., 2020 ).
Of course, the evolution of skeletal traits should not be considered alone, but in a connection
with other related traits, such as postures and gaits. In this context, Mammalia can be characterized
by an erect posture with (nearly) parasagittal limb kinematics in which the limbs support the entire
weight of the trunk ( Biewener et al., 1983 ; Biewener et al., 1988 ; Blob and Biewener, 1999 ).
Same as mammals, birds, and dinosaurs are characterized by an erect posture ( Carrano and Biew-
ener, 1999 ; Alexander, 1985 ) whereas limbed lepidosaurs, crocodilians, and chelonians have a
sprawling posture with laterally projected limbs ( Gans and Webb, 1997 ). In such a configuration,
the weight of the body is essentially distributed as shear stress in the midshaft of the stylopod,
thereby loading the bone in torsion ( Butcher et al., 2008 ; Blob and Biewener, 1999 ; Ashley-
Ross, 1994 ; Sanchez et al., 2010 ). The hypertrophic chondrocytes are therefore not highly stressed
in compression. Contrary to chelonians, some limbed lepidosaurs and crocodilians are capable of
semi-erect posture ( Clemente et al., 2008 ; Schuett et al., 2009 ). This is an intermediate configura-
tion between the sprawling and erect posture ( Gans and Webb, 1997 ). In that position, during the
phases of fast locomotion, the limb-bone strain can significantly increase in axial compression and
bending ( Blob and Biewener, 1999 ; Biewener, 2005 ; Clemente et al., 2011 ; Jd, 2002 ). Crocodili-
ans partition their habitat (to maximize feeding and/or minimize interference and predation), the
juveniles are often restricted to shallow aquatic margins ( Jc, 1994 ; McNease, 1989 ; Tucker et al.,
1997). They barely go out of the water and only occasionally use a semi-erect posture. For these rea-
sons, very little compressive stress is applied to their limb-bone growth plates at the juvenile stage.
This may be the reason why crocodilians develop no SOC at their limb-bone extremities
(Haines, 1938 ). On the contrary, all lizard limb-bones have SOCs ( Haines, 1938 ; Haines, 1942 ;
Ml, 1884 ; Sanchez et al., 2008 ) or calcified secondary center (SC) (in sphenodontids,
Figure 1D ; Haines, 1939 ). Lizards are terrestrial at the juvenile stage. In this exposed environment,
they need to sprint fast and jump to avoid predation and hunt ( Dr, 1996 ; Marsh, 1988 ; Huey, 1982 ;
Gj, 1985 ). Many of them use a semi-erect or bipedal posture for this ( Gans and Webb, 1997 ;
Clemente et al., 2008 ; Schuett et al., 2009 ). Thus, the evolvement of the SOC may provide an
advantage in terms of protection of the hypertrophic chondrocytes, simultaneously with improved
firmness of the joint structure during the juvenile stage. Tortoises also develop exclusively on land.
However, they only display this lateral limb projection typical of sprawling posture, which induces
shear stress on the femoral midshaft ( Butcher and Blob, 2008 ). No compression has been reported
so far in the limb bones of tortoises. In addition, they move in such a slow manner ( Butcher et al.,
2008; Butcher and Blob, 2008 ; Walker, 1971 ; Zani et al., 2005 ) that the threshold of strain-related
stimuli is too low ( Butcher et al., 2008 ) to constrain the microanatomy of limb bones
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 20 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 21 ===
(Nakajima et al., 2014 ) and stress their growth plates. This probably explains why SOCs are not
present in terrestrial tortoise limb bones.
These evolutionary considerations lead us to propose that the development of SOCs (in mammals
and Lepidosauria) or extended ossified protrusions (Archosauria) can be considered as parallel evolu-
tionary traits evolved together with various postures for adaptation to the weight-bearing demands
of terrestrial environments, including the mechanical stress placed on the epiphyseal cartilage in
juveniles. At the same time, the evolutionary transition from water to land was associated with
numerous other changes in the endocrine, respiratory, secretory, and other systems, most of which
exert or may exert various effects on the skeleton. For example, the physiological functions of cal-
cium influence the regulation of numerous types of bone cells. Similarly, the translocation of hemato-
poiesis from the kidney in fish to the bone marrow in terrestrial animals also affects bone physiology.
Thus, mechanical adaptation may not be the only explanation for the development of the SOC.
From an evolutionary perspective, adaptive development of the SOC suggests an underlying
genetic mechanism(s), as opposed to the widely held view that mechanical stress causes this devel-
opment ( Carter and Wong, 1988 ; Klein-Nulend et al., 1986 ; Stevens et al., 1999 ;
Sundaramurthy and Mao, 2006 ; Wong and Carter, 1990 ). Indeed, in many instances, the SOC is
formed during development before the application of mechanical forces. One well-known example
of this is provided by newborn marsupials (e.g., the kangaroo), which are quite immature when born
and need to use their forelimbs (which are much more ossified at this point than their hindlimbs) to
climb into the pouch ( de Oliveira et al., 1998 ). Another example involves ungulates, who must be
able to walk and run within a few hours after birth. Accordingly, in calves, the SOC develops well
before birth ( Geiger et al., 2014 ; Winters et al., 1942 ). The heterochrony in the development of
the SOC in different bones of jerboa and Chiroptera observed here is in line with these observations.
Furthermore, such temporal variation even before birth and within the same limb of Chiroptera pre-
pares adequately for future mechanical demands (see further above). Furthermore, early mechanical
unloading of the hindlimbs of rats had no effect on the development of the SOC and raising
Notophthalmus viridescens , which do not naturally develop a SOC, under terrestrial weight-bearing
environment did not promote the formation of this structure (this study and Libbin et al., 1989 ). All
these findings indicate strongly that the development of the SOC is genetically programmed.
The nature of this genetic programming remains to be elucidated. Interestingly, it was reported
recently that a single nucleotide neomorphic mutation in miRNA140 delays the appearance of the
SOC substantially, without dramatically influencing chondrocyte hypertrophy ( Grigelioniene et al.,
2019), suggesting that the underlying genetic program can be fine-tuned relatively easy. Among
potential endocrine factors, thyroid hormone (TH), which regulates skeletal development in all verte-
brates ( Bassett and Williams, 2016 ), promotes the development of the SOC. In TSHR-deficient
mice formation of the SOC is delayed substantially and this effect can be reversed by T3/
T4 ( Xing et al., 2014 ). Moreover, inactivation of thyroid hormone receptor - alpha (THR1a) in chon-
drocytes impairs their hypertrophy, formation of the SOC, and overall bone growth
(Desjardin et al., 2014 ). At the same time, the SOC develops at different time-points in different
bones suggesting the involvement of local mechanism(s). Indeed, sophisticated pre-receptor control
of the activity/availability of TH (e.g., through the tissue-specific expression of deiodinase enzymes
and transporters) and of their receptors (e.g., through the tissue-specific expression of these recep-
tors and their co-activators and co-repressors) allows tight regulation of the timing and location of
responsiveness to this hormone ( Williams, 2013 ). Since TH influences the expression of approxi-
mately 400 early-response genes in the growth plate ( Desjardin et al., 2014 ) and roughly the same
number of genes during metamorphosis in amphibia ( Das et al., 2009 ), it is difficult at present to
even speculate about which specific genetic program triggered by TH might be involved in regulat-
ing the development of the SOC.
In conclusion, various independent approaches employed in this study (i.e., evolutionary analysis,
mathematical modeling, biophysical tests, comparative zoology, biological experiments) all suggest
that one evolutionary reason for the appearance of a spatially separated growth plate is to shield
the hypertrophic chondrocytes from the mechanical stress associated with weight-bearing and,
accordingly, preserve the mechanism of endochondral bone formation in terrestrial animals. Concep-
tual understanding of the underlying evolutionary, mechanical, and biological reasons behind
the spatial separation of articular cartilage and the growth plate will provide a deeper understanding
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 21 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 22 ===
of skeletal biology and evolution. This, for example, can improve the design of sporting activities for
children or influence surgical interventions related to epiphyseal fractures.
Materials and methods
Key resources table
Reagent type
(species) or resource Designation Source or reference Identifiers Additional information
Strain, strain
background
(Mus musculus )
C57BL/6
(mouse strain)
Charles River
Laboratories
Strain, strain
background
(Rattus norvegicus )
Sprague Dawley
(rat strain)
Janvier Labs
Strain, strain
background
(Mus musculus )
Col2a1-Cre:Sik3F/F
(mouse strain)
Dr. Henry Kronenberg,
Massachusetts
General Hospital
Strain, strain
background
(Mus musculus )
Sik3F/F
(mouse strain)
EUCOMM
Strain, strain
background
(Mus musculus )
Col2a1-Cre (mouse strain) Richard R. Behringer,
University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center
Strain, strain
background
(Mus musculus )
Prx-Cre:GnasR201H
(mouse strain)
Dr. Murat Bastepe,
Massachusetts
General Hospital
Antibody cleaved caspase 3
(rabbit polyclonal)
Cell Signaling #9661 1:500
Antibody YAP
(mouse monoclonal)
Santa Cruz sc-101199 1:50
Antibody p73
(rabbit polyclonal)
Abcam ab137797 1:100
Antibody ki67
(rabbit monoclonal)
Invitrogen MA5-14520 1:20
Antibody MCM2
(rabbit polyclonal)
Abcam ab4461 1:250
Synchrotron scanning and 3D modeling
All these scans were performed at the beamline ID19 (European Synchrotron Radiation Facility,
France) with a current of 200 mA or 16 bunch. Scanning and 3D-modeling of the humerus of Eusthe-
nopteron were performed as described by Sanchez et al., 2014 . The data were reconstructed using
a single distance phase retrieval approach ( Sanchez et al., 2012 ) based on a modified version of the
algorithm of Paganin et al., 2002 , applying an unsharp mask to the radiographs after the phase
retrieval to enhance the trabecular mesh. The humerus of Seymouria was imaged with a voxel size of
3.48 mm using an optical system associated with a 47 mm-thick GGG (i.e., a gadolinium gallium gar-
net crystal) scintillator and a FreLON 2k14 CCD detector ( Labiche et al., 2007 ). The propagation
distance was of 700 mm. The gap of the W150m wiggler was opened to 37 mm. The sample was
imaged at 80 keV using a beam filtered with 0.25 mm of tungsten and 2 mm of aluminum. In half-
acquisition conditions, 4998 projections were produced over 360˚ with a time of exposure of 0.15 s.
Binned images (final 6.96 mm voxel size) were reconstructed, segmented, and 3D-modeled in the
same manner as Eusthenopteron (Sanchez et al., 2014 ). The scan of the humerus of Sciurus vulgaris
was made with the same voxel size (3.48 mm) as for the humerus of Seymouria using the same optics
(FreLON 2k14 CCD camera and a 47 mm-thick GGG scintillator). The sample was imaged with a prop-
agation distance of 500 mm. The beam was filtered with 0.14 mm of tungsten, 0.14 mm of copper,
and 2.8 mm of aluminum. The gap of the W150m wiggler was opened to 50 mm, which resulted in
energy of 65.8keV. In half-acquisition conditions, 4998 projections were produced over 360˚ with a
time of exposure of 0.15 s.
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 22 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 23 ===
MicroCT scan of Pipistrellus pipistrellus s.l
The 1–3 day-old bat was scanned in Vienna with a SkyScan 1174 as previously described
(Metscher, 2009 ).
Mice and rats
30-day-old C57BL/6 mice (body weight 14.59 ± 0.72 g) and 10-day-old Sprague Dawley rats (body
weight 20 ± 0.49 g) were purchased from Charles River Laboratories and Janvier Labs (Europe).
C57BL/6 mice used for the axitinib experiments were purchased from Charles River Laboratories.
Col2a1-Cre:Sik3F/F mice were obtained from Dr. Henry Kronenberg, Massachusetts General Hospi-
tal. The Sik3F/F mice were originally purchased from EUCOMM and the Col2a1-Cre mice were
obtained from Richard R. Behringer, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
(Ovchinnikov et al., 2000 ). Prx-Cre:GnasR201H mice were generated by Dr. Murat Bastepe, Massa-
chusetts General Hospital and were described previously ( Karaca et al., 2018 ).
Dissection, loading, and culturing of the tibia and femur
From both hind legs of 30-day-old mice and 10-day-old rats, the tibia and femur bones were dis-
sected out aseptically in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 50 mg/mL gentamycin (dissection
medium) on ice, with the removal of as much surrounding tissue as possible. The height and diame-
ters of the top and side surfaces of the epiphysis were measured with a digital caliper. For each ani-
mal, one set of tibia and femur was used for control and the other for treatment. All comparisons
involved the bones from the same animal.
Still, in dissection medium on ice, the bones were subjected to pressure with the Instron Electro-
Puls E1000 Test Instrument. The load was applied at a speed of 0.1 N per second and load/digital
position curves recorded in the Bluehill three software. Control bones went through the same proce-
dures, but without loading.
For culturing, bones were first washed twice in dissection medium before being placed into
DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 1 mM b-glycerophosphate, 0.2% bovine serum albumin, 50
mg/mL ascorbic acid, and 50 mg/mL gentamycin for 48 hr as described previously ( Cooper, 2009 ).
Propidium iodide (stock solution at 1 mg/mL, Sigma) was added to the culture medium at a ratio of
1:50 30 min before termination of culturing. The tibia and femur were then fixed in 4% PFA over-
night, decalcified, cleared in 30% sucrose overnight (at 4˚ C), and finally embedded in optimal cut-
ting temperature (OCT) compound for frozen sectioning. When applying the load, the medial tibia
plateau flanked by the tibia bone grooves is always facing one direction and the angled pressure
was applied always to one side of the plateau (on top of one of the grooves). When embedding in
OCT for sectioning, the bone is always placed into the grid with the medial tibia plateau facing
upward and sectioned frontally to ensure the pressure direction during imaging.
Calculation of mechanical and material properties
The determination of the position of the bone relative to the position of its fixture yielded the defor-
mation value. Stiffness was defined as the slope of the initial linear portion of the load-deformation
curve. Stress was calculated by distributing the load equally over the top (vertical load) or side sur-
face (angular load) of the epiphysis, assuming that both of these surfaces were oval. The strain was
calculated by distributing the bone deformation equally along the height of the epiphysis. The initial
linear portion of the stress-strain curve up to 0.2% offset was plotted together with the stress-strain
curve itself in the same graph and the intersection of the line and curve defined as the 0.2% offset
yield strength.
Axitinib injection
Axitinib (Sigma) was dissolved in DMSO and injected intraperitoneally at a dose of 0.25 mg per ani-
mal per day for the C57BL/6 mice for 8 (P21 to P27) or 10 days (P18 to P27 or P21 to
P30). The control group of the C57BL/6 mice received the same volume of DMSO injection each
day. Transgenic Prx-Cre:GnasR201H mice and corresponding GnasR201H controls were injected daily
0.017 mg per gram of body weight between postnatal 21 and 29 days of age to block
the elimination of dead hypertrophic chondrocytes by ingrowing blood vessels. Animals were sacri-
ficed one day after the last axitinib injection.
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 23 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 24 ===
TUNEL staining
About 30 mm thick sections of cultured tibia bones were treated with proteinase K (Ambion) at 10
mg/mL for 40 min at 37˚ C before applying the TUNEL reaction mix (Roche Inc) for 90 min. The cells
were then counter-stained with DAPI for 5 min.
Quantification of positive cells (PI+, TUNEL+, YAP+, etc)
For each data point of the PI+ and TUNEL+ cell number quantification, at least three sections per
animal and at least three animals were analyzed. Double-blind counting was performed for all quan-
tification analysis, including the mediolateral distribution of PI+, TUNEL+, caspase-3+, p73+, YAP+,
and double p73+YAP+ cells.
Immunofluorescent staining
30 mm sections of cultured tibia bones were blocked in 3% normal horse serum for 1 hr, followed by
overnight incubation with primary antibodies against cleaved caspase-3 (1:500) (Cell Signaling), YAP
(1:50) (Santa Cruz), p73 (1:100) (Abcam), Ki67 (1:20) (Invitrogen), or MCM2 (1:250) (Abcam) at 4˚ C.
Secondary antibodies tagged with fluorophore were then added for one hour followed by DAPI
counter-staining for 5 min.
In situ hybridization
In situ hybridization was performed on 30 mm sections as described previously ( Chagin et al., 2014 )
utilizing a probe against ColXa1 (a gift from Prof. Bjorn Olsen, Harvard Medical School) labeled with
digoxigenin (DIG) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions (Roche Inc). Samples were then
treated with either DIG antibody Fab fragments (Sigma) and NTM (Sigma) for colorimetric visualiza-
tion or DIG antibody HRP (Sigma) and TSA kit (Perkin Elmer) for fluorescent visualization.
Atomic force microscopy
About 120–150 mm thick sections of live rat tibia bones were obtained by vibratome (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) and mounted onto glass discs using silicone grease from the Bruker fluid cell accessory kit
(Bruker). The force spectroscopy measurements were performed using a MultiMode eight atomic
force microscope with a Nanoscope V controller and E scanner (Bruker). The regions of cells of inter-
est for the acquisition of force-distance curves were selected under the optical microscope in combi-
nation with the AFM instrument.
The force-distance curves were acquired employing CP-PNP-BSG colloidal probes (NanoandMore
GmbH, Germany) with a 5 mm borosilicate glass microsphere attached to the 200 mm cantilever. The
spring constants of the cantilevers (measured by the thermal tune procedure) were 0.06–0.09 N/m.
All measurements were conducted at 25˚C and all tissue was handled in DMEM/F12 HEPES-con-
taining medium on ice. At least 70 individual force-distance curves were acquired for each type of
cell by ramping over the surface and a total of 30 cells were measured from three different animals.
These force-distance curves were processed with the NanoScope Analysis v.1.10 software (Bruker).
Utilizing retract curves, the elastic modulus E was extracted from these force-distance curves by fit-
ting in accordance with the Hertzian model of contact mechanics.
Nanoindentation
Local mechanical characteristics of 10-day-old rat and 30-day-old mice cartilage samples were mea-
sured with a Piuma Nanoindenter (Optics11, Netherlands) adapted for soft materials. Measurements
were performed on 220–250 mm sections of live tissues (without fixation and freezing) obtained by
vibratome (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 2-4˚C. After the measurement, the sections were stained with
PI (Sigma) and CalceinAM (Sigma) to confirm cell viability.
Nanoindenter includes a controller, an optical fiber, and a spherical tip for the force-displacement
curves acquisition. The tip is attached to a flexible cantilever, the displacement of which after the
contact with a surface is measured using an interferometer via an optical fiber.
To measure the Young’s modulus, the probe was immersed for 5 mm into the sample at each
point of measurement. The Young’s modulus for each point was computed according to the Hertzian
contact mechanics model for a spherical body indenting a flat surface, using the built-in Piuma
software.
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 24 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 25 ===
For the study of 10-day-old rat and 30-day-old mice cartilage mechanical characteristics, we used
a cantilever with the spring constant of 4.14 N/m and a tip with the 45.5 mm radius of curvature. The
measurements were conducted in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) cooled to 2–4˚ С to maintain cell
viability. The samples were immobilized with a specially designed holder immersed in cold PBS. Dur-
ing the measurements, the probe was always located inside the fluid medium at a sufficient depth,
in order to avoid measurement errors due to adhesion forces at the air-water boundary. The area of
the Young’s modulus mapping for rat samples was 1350 /C2400 mm with the step of 45 mm by the
X-axis and 100 mm by the Y-axis. For mice, the area of mapping was 585 /C2360 mm with the step of
45 mm by the X- and Y-axes. Based on the results of the measurements, the effective Young’s modu-
lus was computed, its distribution over the surface was plotted and mean ± standard deviation (SD)
Young’s modulus value calculated.
For the experiment assessing the effect of axitinib on the mechanical properties of epiphyseal
cartilage, between 14 and 96 measurements of cartilage stiffness with nano-indenter were per-
formed for each animal and the median (due to not normal distribution of the measurements) was
chosen as the closest ‘true’ value representing cartilage stiffness for each mouse (six controls and
seven treated mice). These values were employed to assess the effect of the treatment, their normal
distribution verified by the Shapiro–Wilk test (passed; p=0.4051 and p=0.3921 for control and axiti-
nib groups, respectively) and equality of distributions compared by unpaired t-test with n = 6 for
control and n = 7 for treated.
Finite element analysis
The effects of a SOC on the distribution of stress in the zones of bone growth were explored by
numerical simulations. Following the reasoning of Carter et al., 1998 , a plane-strain 2D domain was
considered, to simplify the complex geometry of the bone end, and thereby clarify fundamental
aspects of the response. The model thus considered five sub-domains. The geometry of this simula-
tion domain was a slight modification of Carter et al., 1998 , with a total height of 66 mm, the radius
at the top of 17 mm, and bottom width of 25 mm. The cortical bone was given a width of 2.5 mm
(measured horizontally). The thickness normal to the 2D plane was by definition 1 mm. Only the top
part of the model is shown in the results figures.
The main parameter in these simulations was the presence or absence of a SOC or other stiffer
tissues, introduced by providing this domain with stiffness at least equal to that of the cartilage
domain. Non-linear strains were taken into consideration, but the materials in all subdomains were
considered to be linearly elastic, as described by a Young’s modulus E i and a Poisson ratio ni. We
used the same material properties as ( Carter et al., 1998 ), and in particular for cartilage E C = 6
MPa, nC = 0.47. When included, the SOC was defined in a subdomain with E D = 500 MPa, nD =
0.20. Thus, the stiff tissue had the material properties of dense cancellous bone, that is, approxi-
mately eighty-fold stiffness compared to cartilage.
In all cases, the bottom edge of the complete model had zero displacements vertically, and the
outside edges of the cortical bone zero displacements horizontally. Applied to different 45 o sectors
of the semi-circular top, the pressure was modeled as maximal on the center of the given sector
(300 kPa for physiological level, 3 MPa for supra-physiological), falling quadratically and symmetri-
cally to zero on the two neighboring sector borders. In light of the symmetry of the domain, only the
top- or right-hand side was loaded (except for a verification case to Carter et al., 1998 , not shown).
The direction and integrated total force of loading were affected slightly by the finite deformation of
the domain.
Different components or comparison values of stress (measured as the second Piola-Kirchhoff
stress relative to the unstressed reference volume) were evaluated. The primary focus was on hydro-
static stress, the lowest principal stress (always compressive), and the octahedral shear stress, provid-
ing different perspectives on the response to external loading. Since the situations considered were
dominated by compressive stresses, the signs for the two first have been changed in figures. Stress
values are plotted on the deformed shape of the domain, without magnification of the deformation.
Numerical simulations of the response to loading were based on parameterized finite element
approximations and performed in the Comsol Multiphysics software (version 5.2, Comsol AB, Stock-
holm, Sweden).
With similar loads, this model resulted in stress distribution in and deformation of the cartilagi-
nous epiphysis closely similar to those reported by Carter et al., 1998 .
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 25 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 26 ===
Model design for stem tetrapods and archosaurs were based on Sanchez et al., 2014 ;
Sanchez et al., 2016 and (Chinsamy and Abdala, 2008 ; Ray and Chinsamy, 2004 ), respectively.
Quantitative PCR
Proximal end growth plate of mouse and rat tibia was dissected and homogenized in liquid nitrogen
for subsequent RNA extraction by Trizol and RNA purification by the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). Only RNA
samples with an A260/A280 value between 1.8 and 2.0 were used. Extracted RNA was reverse tran-
scribed into cDNA using a kit from Takara. qPCR was performed using the SYBR Green I supermix
(BioRad) and analyzed using the DCt method by normalizing with the housekepping gene GAPDH.
Three growth plates from independent animals were analyzed for each condition.
Sciatic nerve resection
Wistar-Kyoto rats at P10 were anesthetized with 20 mg/kg Zoletil (Vibrac). On the posterior side of
the right leg, the skin and muscle were dissected, and the sciatic nerve was isolated. For experimen-
tal animals, a 5 mm nerve fragment was excised; for sham-operated animals, the nerve was returned
to the soft tissue without resection. The skin at the operation site was sutured and, after recovery
from anesthesia, the pups were returned to their mother. The suture was treated with povidone-
iodine for 7 days after surgery. Foot sensitivity was tested at P16 using a needle. Video recordings
of gaits were carried out at P11, P14, P20, and P22. The animals were sacrificed at P23 for tissue
collection.
Leg immobilization with kinesiology tape
The right legs of 10-day-old Wistar-Kyoto rats were immobilized using kinesiology tape (Bradex) and
the left legs remain intact. Free-living animals were used as the control group. The tape was
wrapped in two layers to fix the knee and ankle joint. As the rats grew, the tape was changed every
2 days. Rats’ gait pattern was observed daily, and the video was recorded at P14, P20, and P22, to
verify the unloading of the taped leg. Rats were sacrificed at P23 for tissue collection.
SOC size evaluation
Knee samples were fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde for 1 day and decalcified in EDTA. About 20 mm cry-
osections were stained with Safranin O and Fast Green. SOC size was estimated in the middle of the
epiphysis, identifiable by the presence of a cruciate ligament. SOC area was measured and normal-
ized to the total epiphysis area, including the growth plate with Image J.
Bone density evaluation
The primary spongiosa area (500 mm under the growth plate) on hematoxylin and eosin-stained sec-
tions was used to evaluate the bone density. The bone area that is stained with eosin was measured
and normalized to the total primary spongiosa area with Image J.
Footprint rat behavior test
The test was carried out on P20. The rat’s hind legs were painted with iodine and the animal was
allowed to move freely on a blank sheet of paper. After the rat walked along the sheet in one direc-
tion, the sheet was changed. For each rat, at least five records were made. Papers with footprints
were scanned.
Statistical analysis
The values presented as means ± standard deviations of at least three independent experiments.
The unpaired Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA were utilized to calculate P-values if not other-
wise indicated.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported financially by EMBO Long-Term Fellowships (MX) and grants from the
Swedish Research Council (ASC, SS, AI, AnSi), Karolinska Institutet (MX, ASC, LL, IA, including an
SFO Stem/Regen junior grant to ASC), Bertil Hallsten Foundation (IA), EMBO Young Investigator
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 26 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 27 ===
Program (IA), A˚ke Wiberg Foundation (IA), Chinese Scholarship Council (LL), Stiftelsen Frimurare
Barnhuset i Stockholm (PN, MX), Museum of the Southern Jutland (PG), Olle Engkvist Stiftelse
(AnSi), National Institutes of Health (MB: NIDDK RO1 DK073911; HK: NIDDK P1 DK001794). The
Russian Science Foundation financially supported the experiments with atomic force microscopy
(grant #18-15-00401 to PT) and mechanical loading experiments (grant #19-15-00241 to ASC).
O Lambert (IRSNB), MT Olsen (ZMUC), F Zachos (NMW), PHC Lina (Naturalis), D Kalthoff
(Museum of Natural History, Stockholm, Sweden), and J Klembara (CU) provided access to speci-
mens in the collections under their care. Synchrotron beamtime was allocated in response to a pro-
posal accepted by the ESRF (EC203, SS; ES342, JE), as well as in-house (Paul Tafforeau). We are
thankful to Prof. David Eilam (Tel-Aviv University) who kindly shared his opinion as well as a video-
recording of jerboa gait pattern acquisition ( Figure 3—video 2 ).
Additional information
Funding
Funder Author
EMBO Meng Xie
Igor Adameyko
Vetenskapsra ˚ det Sophie Sanchez
Igor Adameyko
Andrei S Chagin
Andra´ s Simon
Russian Science Foundation Peter Timashev
Andrei S Chagin
Stiftelsen Frimurare Barnhuset i
Stockholm
Meng Xie
Phillip T Newton
NIDDK Murat Bastepe
Henry M Kronenberg
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and
interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
Meng Xie, Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Methodology, Writing - original
draft, Writing - review and editing; Pavel Gol’din, Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology,
Cetaceans analysis; Anna Nele Herdina, Data curation, Methodology, Chiroptera analysis; Jordi
Estefa, Ekaterina V Medvedeva, Lei Li, Phillip T Newton, Svetlana Kotova, Boris Shavkuta, Aditya
Saxena, Lauren T Shumate, Brian D Metscher, Karl Großschmidt, Shigeki Nishimori, Anastasia Ako-
vantseva, Data curation; Anna P Usanova, Anastasiia D Kurenkova, Anoop Kumar, Investigation;
Irene Linares Arregui, Methodology; Paul Tafforeau, Kaj Fried, Mattias Carlstro ¨ m, Andra ´ s Simon,
Christian Gasser, Murat Bastepe, Peter Timashev, Resources; Henry M Kronenberg, Kimberly L Coo-
per, Igor Adameyko, Resources, Writing - review and editing; Sophie Sanchez, Resources, Methodol-
ogy, Writing - review and editing; Anders Eriksson, Conceptualization, Data curation, Methodology;
Andrei S Chagin, Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Investigation,
Methodology, Writing - original draft, Project administration, Writing - review and editing
Author ORCIDs
Meng Xie https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6388-9789
Pavel Gol’din http://orcid.org/0000-0001-6118-1384
Brian D Metscher http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6514-4406
Paul Tafforeau https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5962-1683
Andra ´ s Simon http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1018-1891
Kimberly L Cooper http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5892-8838
Sophie Sanchez https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3611-6836
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 27 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 28 ===
Igor Adameyko http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5471-0356
Andrei S Chagin https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2696-5850
Ethics
Animal experimentation: all animal experiments were pre-approved by the Ethical Committee on
Animal Experiments (N5/16, N187/15, 9091-2018, Stockholm North Committee/ Norra Djurfo ¨ rso¨ kse-
tiska Na¨ mnden), the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Massachusetts General
Hospital (Protocols #: 2005N000094 and 2004N000176) or the University of California San Diego
(D16-00020) and conducted in accordance with the provisions and guidelines for animal experimen-
tation formulated by the Swedish Animal Agency. Animal experiments involving limb unloading,
AFM and nanoindentation were pre-approved by the Ethics Committee of the Sechenov First State
Moscow Medical University (No. 07-17 from 13.09.2017, Moscow, Russia).
Decision letter and Author response
Decision letter https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212.sa1
Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212.sa2
Additional files
Supplementary files
. Source data 1. Numerical data for all graphs in the figures.
. Supplementary file 1. Primary data on the level of ossification of the individual bones of all species
of Chiroptera analyzed.
. Transparent reporting form
Data availability
All data generated or analysed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files.
References
Adams RA, Thibault KM. 2000. Ontogeny and evolution of the hindlimb and calcar: assessing phylogenetic
trends. Ontogeny, Functional Ecology, and Evolution of Bats 10:316–332. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511541872.010
Alexander RM. 1985. Mechanics of posture and gait of some large dinosaurs. Zoological Journal of the Linnean
Society 83:1–25. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1096-3642.1985.tb00871.x
Anderson JF, Hall-Martin A, Russell DA. 1985. Long-bone circumference and weight in mammals, birds and
dinosaurs. Journal of Zoology 207:53–61. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7998.1985.tb04915.x
Ashley-Ross M. 1994. Hindlimb kinematics during terrestrial locomotion in a salamander (Dicamptodon
tenebrosus). The Journal of Experimental Biology 193:255–283. PMID: 9317755
Barreto C, Albrecht RM, Bjorling DE, Horner JR, Wilsman NJ. 1993. Evidence of the growth plate and the growth
of long bones in juvenile dinosaurs. Science 262:2020–2023. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.262.5142.
2020, PMID: 17794968
Bassett JH, Williams GR. 2016. Role of thyroid hormones in skeletal development and bone maintenance.
Endocrine Reviews 37:135–187. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1210/er.2015-1106, PMID: 26862888
Biewener AA, Thomason J, Goodship A, Lanyon LE. 1983. Bone stress in the horse forelimb during locomotion
at different gaits: a comparison of two experimental methods. Journal of Biomechanics 16:565–576.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9290(83)90107-0, PMID: 6643529
Biewener AA, Thomason JJ, Lanyon LE. 1988. Mechanics of locomotion and jumping in the horse ( Equus): in
vivo stress in the tibia and metatarsus . Journal of Zoology 214:547–565. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-
7998.1988.tb03759.x
Biewener AA. 1989. Scaling body support in mammals: limb posture and muscle mechanics. Science 245:45–48.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.2740914, PMID: 2740914
Biewener AA. 1990. Biomechanics of mammalian terrestrial locomotion. Science 250:1097–1103. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.2251499, PMID: 2251499
Biewener AA. 2005. Biomechanical consequences of scaling. Journal of Experimental Biology 208:1665–1676.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.01520, PMID: 15855398
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 28 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 29 ===
Blob RW, Biewener AA. 1999. In vivo locomotor strain in the hindlimb bones of Alligator mississippiensis and
Iguana iguana: implications for the evolution of limb bone safety factor and non-sprawling limb posture. The
Journal of Experimental Biology 202:1023–1046. PMID: 10101104
Bou J, Casinos A, Ocan˜a J. 1987. Allometry of the limb long bones of insectivores and rodents. Journal of
Morphology 192:113–123. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/jmor.1051920204, PMID: 3599079
Breur GJ, Turgai J, Vanenkevort BA, Farnum CE, Wilsman NJ. 1994. Stereological and serial section analysis of
chondrocytic enlargement in the proximal tibial growth plate of the rat. The Anatomical Record 239:255–268.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ar.1092390304, PMID: 7943757
Burdett RG. 1982. Forces predicted at the ankle during running. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 14:
308–316. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1249/00005768-198204000-00010, PMID: 7132650
Butcher MT, Espinoza NR, Cirilo SR, Blob RW. 2008. In vivo strains in the femur of river cooter turtles
(Pseudemys concinna) during terrestrial locomotion: tests of force-platform models of loading mechanics.
Journal of Experimental Biology 211:2397–2407. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.018986, PMID: 18626073
Butcher MT, Blob RW. 2008. Mechanics of limb bone loading during terrestrial locomotion in river cooter turtles
(Pseudemys concinna). Journal of Experimental Biology 211:1187–1202. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.
012989, PMID: 18375843
Campione NE, Evans DC. 2012. A universal scaling relationship between body mass and proximal limb bone
dimensions in quadrupedal terrestrial tetrapods. BMC Biology 10:60. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/1741-7007-
10-60, PMID: 22781121
Carrano MT, Biewener AA. 1999. Experimental alteration of limb posture in the chicken (Gallus gallus) and its
bearing on the use of birds as analogs for dinosaur locomotion. Journal of Morphology 240:237–249.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-4687(199906)240:3<237::AID-JMOR3>3.0.CO;2-N, PMID: 10367398
Carter DR, MikiC´ B, Padian K. 1998. Epigenetic mechanical factors in the evolution of long bone epiphyses.
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 123:163–178. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1096-3642.1998.
tb01298.x
Carter DR, Wong M. 1988. The role of mechanical loading histories in the development of diarthrodial joints.
Journal of Orthopaedic Research 6:804–816. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.1100060604, PMID: 3171761
Castanhinha R, Arau´ jo R, Ju´ nior LC, Angielczyk KD, Martins GG, Martins RM, Chaouiya C, Beckmann F, Wilde F.
2013. Bringing dicynodonts back to life: paleobiology and anatomy of a new emydopoid genus from the upper
permian of Mozambique. PLOS ONE 8:e80974. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0080974,
PMID: 24324653
Chagin AS, Karimian E, Sundstro¨ m K, Eriksson E, Sa¨ vendahl L. 2010. Catch-up growth after dexamethasone
withdrawal occurs in cultured postnatal rat metatarsal bones. Journal of Endocrinology 204:21–29.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1677/JOE-09-0307, PMID: 19815587
Chagin AS, Vuppalapati KK, Kobayashi T, Guo J, Hirai T, Chen M, Offermanns S, Weinstein LS, Kronenberg HM.
2014. G-protein stimulatory subunit alpha and gq/11 a G-proteins are both required to maintain quiescent
stem-like chondrocytes. Nature Communications 5:3673. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4673,
PMID: 24781502
Chinsamy A, Abdala F. 2008. Palaeobiological implications of the bone microstructure of south american
traversodontids (Therapsida: cynodontia). South African Journal of Science 104:225–230.
Clemente CJ, Withers PC, Thompson G, Lloyd D. 2008. Why go bipedal? locomotion and morphology in
australian agamid lizards. Journal of Experimental Biology 211:2058–2065. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.
018044, PMID: 18552294
Clemente CJ, Withers PC, Thompson G, Lloyd D. 2011. Evolution of limb bone loading and body size in varanid
lizards. Journal of Experimental Biology 214:3013–3020. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.059345, PMID: 21
865513
Cooper LN, Sedano N, Johansson S, May B, Brown JD, Holliday CM, Kot BW, Fish FE. 2008. Hydrodynamic
performance of the minke whale (Balaenoptera acutorostrata) flipper. Journal of Experimental Biology 211:
1859–1867. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.014134, PMID: 18515715
Cooper LN. 2009. Forelimb Anatomy, Encyclopedia of Marine Mammals . Academic Press.
Cooper KL, Oh S, Sung Y, Dasari RR, Kirschner MW, Tabin CJ. 2013. Multiple phases of chondrocyte
enlargement underlie differences in skeletal proportions. Nature 495:375–378. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature11940, PMID: 23485973
Das B, Heimeier RA, Buchholz DR, Shi YB. 2009. Identification of direct thyroid hormone response genes reveals
the earliest gene regulation programs during frog metamorphosis. Journal of Biological Chemistry 284:34167–
34178. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M109.066084, PMID: 19801647
de Medinaceli L , Freed WJ, Wyatt RJ. 1982. An index of the functional condition of rat sciatic nerve based on
measurements made from walking tracks. Experimental Neurology 77:634–643. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
0014-4886(82)90234-5, PMID: 7117467
de Oliveira CA , Nogueira JC, Mahecha GA. 1998. Sequential order of appearance of ossification centers in the
opossum Didelphis albiventris (Didelphidae) skeleton during development in the marsupium. Annals of
Anatomy - Anatomischer Anzeiger 180:113–121. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0940-9602(98)80005-8, PMID:
9587634
Desjardin C, Charles C, Benoist-Lasselin C, Riviere J, Gilles M, Chassande O, Morgenthaler C, Laloe ´ D,
Lecardonnel J, Flamant F, Legeai-Mallet L, Schibler L. 2014. Chondrocytes play a major role in the stimulation
of bone growth by thyroid hormone. Endocrinology 155:3123–3135. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2014-
1109, PMID: 24914940
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 29 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 30 ===
Dr C. 1996. Ontogenetic limits on locomotor performance. Physiological Zoology 69:467–488. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.2307/30164211
Dupont S, Morsut L, Aragona M, Enzo E, Giulitti S, Cordenonsi M, Zanconato F, Le Digabel J, Forcato M,
Bicciato S, Elvassore N, Piccolo S. 2011. Role of YAP/TAZ in mechanotransduction. Nature 474:179–183.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10137, PMID: 21654799
Eilam D, Shefer G. 1997. The developmental order of bipedal locomotion in the jerboa (Jaculus orientalis):
pivoting, creeping, quadrupedalism, and bipedalism. Developmental Psychobiology 31:137–142. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1098-2302(199709)31:2<137::AID-DEV6>3.0.CO;2-L, PMID: 9298639
Elangovan V, Yuvana Satya Priya E, Raghuram H, Marimuthu G. 2007. Wing morphology and flight development
in the short-nosed fruit bat Cynopterus sphinx. Zoology 110:189–196. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.zool.2007.
02.001, PMID: 17434300
Form UM. 2004. Function, and anatomy of dorudon atrox (Mammalia, cetacea): an archaeocete from the middle
to late eocene of Egypt. Papers on Paleontology 34:1–222.
Fro¨ bisch NB, Shubin NH. 2011. Salamander limb development: integrating genes, morphology, and fossils.
Developmental Dynamics 240:1087–1099. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/dvdy.22629, PMID: 21465623
Galile G. 1974. Two New Sciences, Including Centers of Gravity & Force of Percussion Translation by Stillman
Drake of Galileo’s 1638 Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Concerning Two New Sciences .
University of Wisconsin Press.
Gans CGA, Webb PW. 1997. Vertebrate Locomotion. In: Dantzler WH (Ed). Handbook of Physiology: Section 13:
Comparative Physiology, an American Physiological Society Book . Oxford University Press. p. 55–213.
Geiger M, Forasiepi AM, Koyabu D, Sa ´ nchez-Villagra MR. 2014. Heterochrony and post-natal growth in
mammals–an examination of growth plates in limbs. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 27:98–115. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1111/jeb.12279, PMID: 24251599
Gemmell NJ, Rutherford K, Prost S, Tollis M, Winter D, Macey JR, Adelson DL, Suh A, Bertozzi T, Grau JH,
Organ C, Gardner PP, Muffato M, Patricio M, Billis K, Martin FJ, Flicek P, Petersen B, Kang L, Michalak P, et al.
2020. The tuatara genome reveals ancient features of amniote evolution. Nature 584:403–409. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2561-9, PMID: 32760000
Gerber HP, Vu TH, Ryan AM, Kowalski J, Werb Z, Ferrara N. 1999. VEGF couples hypertrophic cartilage
remodeling, ossification and angiogenesis during endochondral bone formation. Nature Medicine 5:623–628.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/9467, PMID: 10371499
Gingerich PD, Ul-Haq M, von Koenigswald W, Sanders WJ, Smith BH, Zalmout IS. 2009. New protocetid whale
from the middle eocene of Pakistan: birth on land, precocial development, and sexual dimorphism. PLOS ONE
4:e4366. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0004366, PMID: 19194487
Gj T. 1985. Ontogenetic and individual variation in size, shape and speed in the australian agamid lizard
Amphibolurus nuchalis. Journal of Zoology 207:425–439. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7998.1985.
tb04941.x
Grigelioniene G, Suzuki HI, Taylan F, Mirzamohammadi F, Borochowitz ZU, Ayturk UM, Tzur S, Horemuzova E,
Lindstrand A, Weis MA, Grigelionis G, Hammarsjo¨ A, Marsk E, Nordgren A, Nordenskjo¨ ld M, Eyre DR, Warman
ML, Nishimura G, Sharp PA, Kobayashi T. 2019. Gain-of-function mutation of microRNA-140 in human skeletal
dysplasia. Nature Medicine 25:583–590. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0353-2, PMID: 30804514
Haines RW. 1938. The primitive form of epiphysis in the long bones of tetrapods. Journal of Anatomy 72:323–
343. PMID: 17104701
Haines RW. 1939. The structure of the epiphyses in Sphenodon and the primitive form of secondary centre.
Journal of Anatomy 74:80–90. PMID: 17104804
Haines RW. 1942. The evolution of epiphyses and of endochondral bone. Biological Reviews 17:267–292.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-185X.1942.tb00440.x
Hall BK. 2015. Bones and Cartilage Developmental and Evolutionary Skeletal Biology . Elsevier Academic Press.
Hermanson JW, Wilkins KT. 2008. Growth and development of two species of bats in a shared maternity roost.
Cells Tissues Organs 187:24–34. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1159/000109961, PMID: 18160800
Horner JR, Padian K, de Ricqle ` s A. 2001. Comparative osteohistology of some embryonic and perinatal
archosaurs: developmental and behavioral implications for dinosaurs. Paleobiology 27:39–58. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1666/0094-8373(2001)027<0039:COOSEA>2.0.CO;2
Huey RB. 1982. Phylogenetic and ontogenetic determinants of sprint performance in some diurnal kalahari
lizards. Koedoe - African Protected Area Conservation and Science 25:43–48. DOI: https://doi.org/10.4102/
koedoe.v25i1.602
Hughes PM, Rayner JMV, Jonesg G. 1995. Ontogeny of ‘true’ flight and other aspects of growth in the bat
Pipistrellus pipistrellus . Journal of Zoology 236:291–318. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7998.1995.
tb04494.x
Hurlbert SH. 1969. BreedingMigrations and Interhabitat Wandering of Vermilon-Spotted NewtNotophthalmus-
Viridescens (Rafinesque). Ecological Monographs.
Jc H. 1994. Body size, spatial distribution, and microhabitat use in the caimans, Melanosuchus niger and Caiman
crocodilus, in a peruvian lake. Journal of Herpetology 28:508–513.
Jd C. 2002. Bones: Structure and Mechanics . Princeton University Press.
Karaca A, Malladi VR, Zhu Y, Tafaj O, Paltrinieri E, Wu JY, He Q, Bastepe M. 2018. Constitutive stimulatory G
protein activity in limb mesenchyme impairs bone growth. Bone 110:230–237. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
bone.2018.02.016
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 30 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 31 ===
Kiiskinen A. 1977. Physical training and connective tissues in young mice-physical properties of achilles tendons
and long bones. Growth 41:123–137. PMID: 892579
Klein-Nulend J, Veldhuijzen JP, Burger EH. 1986. Increased calcification of growth plate cartilage as a result of
compressive force in vitro. Arthritis & Rheumatism 29:1002–1009. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/art.1780290809
Koyabu D, Son NT. 2014. Patterns of postcranial ossification and sequence heterochrony in bats: life histories
and developmental trade-offs. Journal of Experimental Zoology. Part B, Molecular and Developmental
Evolution 322:607–618. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/jez.b.22581, PMID: 24863050
Kozhemyakina E, Lassar AB, Zelzer E. 2015. A pathway to bone: signaling molecules and transcription factors
involved in chondrocyte development and maturation. Development 142:817–831. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1242/dev.105536, PMID: 25715393
Kunz TH, Hood WR. 2000. Parental care and postnatal growth in the chiroptera. Reproductive Biology of Bats 4:
415–468. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012195670-7/50011-4
Labiche JC, Mathon O, Pascarelli S, Newton MA, Ferre GG, Curfs C, Vaughan G, Homs A, Carreiras DF. 2007.
Invited article: the fast readout low noise Camera as a versatile x-ray detector for time resolved dispersive
extended x-ray absorption fine structure and diffraction studies of dynamic problems in materials science,
chemistry, and catalysis. Review of Scientific Instruments 78:091301. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2783112,
PMID: 17902940
Libbin RM, Mitchell OG, Guerra L, Person P. 1989. Delayed carpal ossification in Notophthalmus viridescens efts:
relation to the progress of mesopodial completion in newt forelimb regenerates. Journal of Experimental
Zoology 252:207–211. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/jez.1402520213, PMID: 2600563
Marsh RL. 1988. Ontogenesis of contractile properties of skeletal muscle and sprint performance in the lizard
Dipsosaurus dorsalis. The Journal of Experimental Biology 137:119–139. PMID: 3209964
Matsuda JJ, Zernicke RF, Vailas AC, Pedrini VA, Pedrini-Mille A, Maynard JA. 1986. Structural and mechanical
adaptation of immature bone to strenuous exercise. Journal of Applied Physiology 60:2028–2034. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1152/jappl.1986.60.6.2028
McNease LJT. 1989. A Study of Immature Alligators on Rockefeller Refuge, Louisiana, Division of Administration .
Administrative Services.
Mehlman CT, Araghi A, Roy DR. 1997. Hyphenated history: the Hueter-Volkmann law. American Journal of
Orthopedics 26:798–800. PMID: 9402217
Mellor L, Cooper LN, Torre J, Brownell RL. 2009. Paedomorphic ossification in porpoises with an emphasis on
the vaquita (Phocoena sinus). Aquatic Mammals 35:193–202. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1578/AM.35.2.2009.193
Metscher BD. 2009. MicroCT for comparative morphology: simple staining methods allow high-contrast 3D
imaging of diverse non-mineralized animal tissues. BMC Physiology 9:11. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-
6793-9-11, PMID: 19545439
Ml D. 1884. Sur les e ´ piphyses des lacertiliens. Zoologischer Anzeiger 7:65–70.
Nakajima Y, Hirayama R, Endo H. 2014. Turtle humeral microanatomy and its relationship to lifestyle. Biological
Journal of the Linnean Society 112:719–734. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/bij.12336
Newton PT, Li L, Zhou B, Schweingruber C, Hovorakova M, Xie M, Sun X, Sandhow L, Artemov AV, Ivashkin E,
Suter S, Dyachuk V, El Shahawy M, Gritli-Linde A, Bouderlique T, Petersen J, Mollbrink A, Lundeberg J,
Enikolopov G, Qian H, et al. 2019. A radical switch in clonality reveals a stem cell niche in the epiphyseal
growth plate. Nature 567:234–238. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-0989-6
Ovchinnikov DA, Deng JM, Ogunrinu G, Behringer RR. 2000. Col2a1-directed expression of cre recombinase in
differentiating chondrocytes in transgenic mice. Genesis 26:145–146. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1526-
968X(200002)26:2<145::AID-GENE14>3.0.CO;2-C, PMID: 10686612
Ozgu¨ ven HN, Berme N. 1988. An experimental and analytical study of impact forces during human jumping.
Journal of Biomechanics 21:1061–1066. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9290(88)90252-7, PMID: 2577952
Paganin D, Mayo SC, Gureyev TE, Miller PR, Wilkins SW. 2002. Simultaneous phase and amplitude extraction
from a single defocused image of a homogeneous object. Journal of Microscopy 206:33–40. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1046/j.1365-2818.2002.01010.x, PMID: 12000561
Perttunen JO, Kyro¨ la¨ inen H, Komi PV, Heinonen A. 2000. Biomechanical loading in the triple jump. Journal of
Sports Sciences 18:363–370. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/026404100402421, PMID: 10855682
Powers L, Kandarian S, Kunz T. 1991. Ontogeny of flight in the little Brown bat, Myotis lucifugus: behavior,
morphology, and muscle histochemistry. Journal of Comparative Physiology A 168:675–685. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1007/BF00224357
Racey PA, Entwistle AC. 2000. Life-history and reproductive strategies of bats. Reproductive Biology of Bats 2:
363–414. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-012195670-7/50010-2
Ray S, Chinsamy A. 2004. Diictodon feliceps (Therapsida, Dicynodontia): bone histology, growth, and
biomechanics . Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 24:180–194. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1671/1914-14
Reich A, Jaffe N, Tong A, Lavelin I, Genina O, Pines M, Sklan D, Nussinovitch A, Monsonego-Ornan E. 2005.
Weight loading young chicks inhibits bone elongation and promotes growth plate ossification and
vascularization. Journal of Applied Physiology 98:2381–2389. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.01073.
2004
Sanchez S, Klembara J, Castanet J, Steyer JS. 2008. Salamander-like development in a seymouriamorph revealed
by palaeohistology. Biology Letters 4:411–414. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2008.0159, PMID: 18460423
Sanchez S, Germain D, De Ricqle ` s A, Abourachid A, Goussard F, Tafforeau P. 2010. Limb-bone histology of
temnospondyls: implications for understanding the diversification of palaeoecologies and patterns of
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 31 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology

=== PAGE 32 ===
locomotion of Permo-Triassic tetrapods. Journal of Evolutionary Biology 23:2076–2090. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1420-9101.2010.02081.x, PMID: 20840306
Sanchez S, Ahlberg PE, Trinajstic KM, Mirone A, Tafforeau P. 2012. Three-dimensional synchrotron virtual
paleohistology: a new insight into the world of fossil bone microstructures. Microscopy and Microanalysis 18:
1095–1105. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/S1431927612001079, PMID: 23026256
Sanchez S, Tafforeau P, Ahlberg PE. 2014. The humerus of eusthenopteron: a puzzling organization presaging
the establishment of tetrapod limb bone marrow. Proceedings. Biological Sciences 1782:0299. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2014.0299
Sanchez S, Tafforeau P, Clack JA, Ahlberg PE. 2016. Life history of the stem tetrapod acanthostega revealed by
synchrotron microtomography. Nature 537:408–411. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature19354,
PMID: 27602519
Sasagawa S, Takemori H, Uebi T, Ikegami D, Hiramatsu K, Ikegawa S, Yoshikawa H, Tsumaki N. 2012. SIK3 is
essential for chondrocyte hypertrophy during skeletal development in mice. Development 139:1153–1163.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.072652
Schuett GW, Reiserer RS, Earley RL. 2009. The evolution of bipedal postures in varanoid lizards. Biological
Journal of the Linnean Society 97:652–663. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1095-8312.2009.01227.x
Stevens SS, Beaupre ´ GS, Carter DR. 1999. Computer model of endochondral growth and ossification in long
bones: biological and mechanobiological influences. Journal of Orthopaedic Research 17:646–653.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.1100170505, PMID: 10569472
Strano S, Munarriz E, Rossi M, Castagnoli L, Shaul Y, Sacchi A, Oren M, Sudol M, Cesareni G, Blandino G. 2001.
Physical interaction with Yes-associated protein enhances p73 transcriptional activity. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 276:15164–15173. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M010484200, PMID: 11278685
Sundaramurthy S, Mao JJ. 2006. Modulation of endochondral development of the distal femoral condyle by
mechanical loading. Journal of Orthopaedic Research 24:229–241. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.20024,
PMID: 16435356
Tucker AD, McCallum HI, Limpus CJ. 1997. Habitat use by Crocodylus johnstoni in the lynd river, Queensland.
Journal of Herpetology 31:114–121. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2307/1565339
Walker WF. 1971. A structural and functional analysis of walking in the turtle, Chrysemys picta marginata. Journal
of Morphology 134:195–213. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/jmor.1051340205, PMID: 5135653
Wang L, Lin A, Xiao Y, Jiang T, Feng J. 2014. Postnatal development in the big-footed bat, Myotis
macrodactylus: wing morphology, echolocation calls, and flight. Acta Theriologica 59:435–441. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1007/s13364-014-0182-0
Watanabe J. 2018. Ontogeny of Macroscopic Morphology of Limb Bones in Modernaquatic Birds and Their
Implications for Ontogenetic Ageing: Museo Argentino De Ciencias Naturales . Bernardino Rivadavia.
Williams GR. 2013. Thyroid hormone actions in cartilage and bone. European Thyroid Journal 2:3–13.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1159/000345548, PMID: 24783033
Wilsman NJ, Farnum CE, Leiferman EM, Fry M, Barreto C. 1996. Differential growth by growth plates as a
function of multiple parameters of chondrocytic kinetics. Journal of Orthopaedic Research 14:927–936.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.1100140613, PMID: 8982136
Winters LM, Green WW, Comstock RE. 1942. Prenatal Development of the Bovine . University of Minnesota
Agricultural Experiment Station.
Wong M, Carter D. 1990. A theoretical model of endochondral ossification and bone architectural construction in
long bone ontogeny. Anatomy and Embryology 181:523–532. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00174625
Xing W, Cheng S, Wergedal J, Mohan S. 2014. Epiphyseal chondrocyte secondary ossification centers require
thyroid hormone activation of indian hedgehog and osterix signaling. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research
29:2262–2275. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.2256, PMID: 24753031
Xu X, Li Z, Cai L, Calve S, Neu CP. 2016. Mapping the nonreciprocal micromechanics of individual cells and the
surrounding matrix within living tissues. Scientific Reports 6:24272. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/srep24272,
PMID: 27067516
Yadav P, Shefelbine SJ, Gutierrez-Farewik EM. 2016. Effect of growth plate geometry and growth direction on
prediction of proximal femoral morphology. Journal of Biomechanics 49:1613–1619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jbiomech.2016.03.039, PMID: 27063249
Yang L, Tsang KY, Tang HC, Chan D, Cheah KS. 2014. Hypertrophic chondrocytes can become osteoblasts and
osteocytes in endochondral bone formation. PNAS 111:12097–12102. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1302703111, PMID: 25092332
Zani PA, Gottschall JS, Kram R. 2005. Giant galapagos tortoises walk without inverted pendulum mechanical-
energy exchange. Journal of Experimental Biology 208:1489–1494. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.01554,
PMID: 15802673
Xie et al. eLife 2020;9:e55212. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55212 32 of 32
Research article Developmental Biology Evolutionary Biology
