 pmc Dev Dyn Dev Dyn 379 blackwellopen 9201927 DVDY Developmental Dynamics 1058-8388 1097-0177 pmc-is-collection-domain yes pmc-collection-title Wiley Open Access Collection PMC12678681 PMC12678681.1 12678681 12678681 40088130 10.1002/dvdy.70013 DVDY70013 1 Phenotype Report Phenotype Report The role of the PTHrP /Ihh feedback loop in the unusual growth plate location in mammalian metatarsals and pisiforms Reno et al. Reno Philip L. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7053-0344 1 philipre@pcom.edu Wallace Sherrie 1 Doelp Sarah N. 1 Biancaniello Maria 1 Kjosness Kelsey M. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7173-2805 1 1 Department of Biomedical Sciences Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine Philadelphia Pennsylvania USA * Correspondence Philip L. Reno, 4170 City Ave, Philadelphia, PA 19131, USA. Email: philipre@pcom.edu 15 3 2025 12 2025 254 12 501907 10.1002/dvdy.v254.12 1307 1324 03 2 2025 28 8 2024 25 2 2025 05 12 2025 06 12 2025 06 12 2025 © 2025 The Author(s). Developmental Dynamics published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Association for Anatomy. https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made. Abstract Background Longitudinal skeletal growth takes place in the cartilaginous growth plates. While growth plates are found at either end of conventional long bones, they occur at a variety of locations in the mammalian skeleton. For example, the metacarpals and metatarsals (MT) in the hands and feet form only a single growth plate at one end, and the pisiform in the wrist is the only carpal bone to contain a growth plate. We take advantage of this natural anatomical variation to test which components of the PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop, a fundamental regulator of chondrocyte differentiation, are specific to growth plate function. Results Parathyroid hormone‐like hormone ( Pthlh ), the gene that transcribes parathyroid hormone‐related peptide (PTHrP), is expressed in the reserve zone of the growth plate‐forming end of the MT. At the opposite end, the absence of a PTHrP+ reserve zone results in premature chondrocyte differentiation and Indian hedgehog ( Ihh ) expression. Pthlh is expressed in the reserve zone of the developing pisiform, confirming the existence of a true growth plate. Conclusion A pool of PTHrP+ reserve zone chondrocytes is a defining characteristic of growth plates, and its patterning may be key to evolved differences in growth plate location in the mammalian skeleton. Key Findings Mammalian metatarsal bones form only a single growth plate at one end, and the pisiform uniquely forms a growth plate compared to other carpal bones. The PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop is fundamental to growth plate regulation, and by comparing the expression of these genes across anatomical sites that differ in endochondral ossification, we can better understand the role of this loop in growth plate formation. We find that a population of PTHrP+ chondroprogenitors is only found in reserve zone chondrocytes on the growth plate forming ends of metatarsals and in pisiforms. Natural variation in endochondral ossification across the mammalian skeleton is a useful tool for understanding the genetic regulation of the growth plate. cartilage chondroprogenitor ossification Ptch1 Pth1r Pthlh reserve zone National Science Foundation 10.13039/100000001 BCS‐1638812 IOS‐1656315 pmc-status-qastatus 0 pmc-status-live yes pmc-status-embargo no pmc-status-released yes pmc-prop-open-access yes pmc-prop-olf no pmc-prop-manuscript no pmc-prop-legally-suppressed no pmc-prop-has-pdf yes pmc-prop-has-supplement no pmc-prop-pdf-only no pmc-prop-suppress-copyright no pmc-prop-is-real-version no pmc-prop-is-scanned-article no pmc-prop-preprint no pmc-prop-in-epmc yes pmc-license-ref CC BY-NC-ND source-schema-version-number 2.0 cover-date December 2025 details-of-publishers-convertor Converter:WILEY_ML3GV2_TO_JATSPMC version:6.6.6 mode:remove_FC converted:04.12.2025 Reno PL , Wallace S , Doelp SN , Biancaniello M , Kjosness KM . The role of the PTHrP /Ihh feedback loop in the unusual growth plate location in mammalian metatarsals and pisiforms . Developmental Dynamics . 2025 ; 254 ( 12 ): 1307 ‐ 1324 . doi: 10.1002/dvdy.70013 40088130 PMC12678681 1 INTRODUCTION The major long bones in the limbs lengthen through the actions of growth plates (GP), which preserve a zone of cartilage that enables rapid growth by endochondral ossification from each end. 1 Each GP maintains a population of chondrocytes that are tightly controlled with respect to their differentiation, proliferation, and spatial arrangement. 2 At the top of the GP is a reserve (or resting) zone that contains round progenitor cells that seed the GP (Figure 1 ). These cells differentiate into columnar (or proliferative) chondrocytes that divide parallel to the long axis of the bone to form stacks of clonal daughter cells. They then become hypertrophic chondrocytes that expand in size and calcify the supporting cartilage matrix. Most of these chondrocytes undergo apoptosis, leaving the cartilage matrix as the scaffold for bone to be laid down by osteoblasts advancing with the primary center of ossification. FIGURE 1 Growth plate chondrocytes differentiate through reserve, columnar, prehypertrophic, and hypertrophic stages before they undergo apoptosis and are replaced by bone. To regulate differentiation, reserve chondrocytes express parathyroid hormone‐like hormone ( Pthlh ). The protein product, parathyroid hormone‐related peptide (PTHrP), signals to columnar chondrocytes to delay hypertrophic differentiation. Once pushed away from the reserve zone, chondrocytes express Indian hedgehog ( Ihh ) which signals back to reserve chondrocytes to promote Pthlh expression and preserve cells in the columnar zone. This feedback loop serves to regulate differentiation and ensure a pool of proliferative chondrocytes throughout growth. Chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation are tightly controlled through the PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop (Figure 1 ). 3 , 4 Reserve chondrocytes express the parathyroid hormone‐like hormone ( Pthlh ) gene and secrete its protein product parathyroid hormone‐related peptide (PTHrP). This protein diffuses to the columnar chondrocytes and binds to the parathyroid 1 receptor (PTH1R), where it serves to maintain columnar chondrocyte proliferation while limiting their hypertrophic differentiation. Continued proliferation pushes chondrocytes further from the reserve zone to a region where PTHrP protein concentration is lower. With this reduced signal, the chondrocytes become prehypertrophic and express Indian hedgehog ( Ihh ). IHH protein signals to the widely distributed patched receptor (PTCH1), which promotes reserve chondrocytes to continue the expression of Pthlh . IHH also increases proliferation directly in columnar chondrocytes and promotes bone formation by the invading osteoblasts from the primary center of ossification and the surrounding bone collar. 5 , 6 , 7 In this way, the PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop ensures proper GP function that preserves a population of highly proliferative chondrocytes undergoing coordinated differentiation. 8 While typical long bones form GPs at both ends, this is not the default outcome for endochondral ossification. Secondary centers of ossification in epiphyses and most of the carpals and tarsals in the wrist and ankle undergo cartilage replacement without forming GPs. 9 At these sites, chondrocytes still proceed through the same basic differentiation steps without generating expanded and enduring columnar and hypertrophic zones. In addition, GPs can be lost or gained through evolution from specific regions of the skeleton. For example, the short tubular bones in the hands and feet (metacarpals, metatarsals, and phalanges) establish a GP at only one end. 10 In the neonatal mouse, the ossification process at the proximal and distal ends appears to be generally similar, with each end preserving regions of round undifferentiated, columnar, and hypertrophic chondrocytes that visually resemble the zones in GPs. However, true GPs only form in the distal ends of metacarpals and metatarsals (MT) of posterior digit rays II–V and the proximal ends of the metacarpal and MT of the first ray. Growth plates also form solely in the proximal end of all phalanges 1 . The opposite end of each of these bones undergoes direct ossification, where the individual columnar and hypertrophic zones begin to thin and disorganize until they are ultimately lost. The cartilage is then replaced by the invasion of the primary center of ossification into the epiphysis. Lastly, both the pisiform in the wrist and the calcaneus in the ankle form from two separate centers of ossification. 11 , 12 Between them resides a singular GP‐preserving chondrocytes that appear to be progressing through reserve, columnar, and hypertrophic stages. 11 Such variation in the location of GPs indicates that their presence is specifically patterned during development. 13 A progenitor pool of chondrocytes that populate and organize the GP was initially demonstrated by surgical studies in rabbits. Isolation and reorientation of the reserve zone showed that it had the ability to repopulate and reorient the chondrocyte column. 14 More recent experiments using conditional cell lineage tracing reveal a stem cell niche in the reserve zone that is made up of a pool of PTHrP‐expressing chondrocytes. 15 PTHrP+ cells divide to repopulate the reserve zone while also differentiating into clonal lineages that form columnar and hypertrophic chondrocytes in the GP. Some cells have been shown to survive ossification to form osteoblasts, stromal cells, and adipocytes within the marrow cavity. 15 , 16 , 17 These studies indicate that establishing the pool of PTHrP+ cells is an important first step in determining the location of GP formation. The importance of the PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop for regulating GP formation is well understood, yet little is known about its role in managing GP location within bones and the resulting natural variation in GP location throughout the skeleton. The unusual ossification of the hands and feet provides a natural model to test the association between gene expression and GP formation. Each MT produces a paired comparison of a GP‐forming and non‐forming cartilage in age‐matched tissues that share similar biomechanical and physiological environments. Furthermore, the difference between the posterior MTs of rays II–V (MT2‐MT5) and MT1 allows potential confounding differences in proximal/distal gene expression to be addressed. Thus, we assess the expression of Pthlh , Pth1R , Ihh , and Ptch1 in the GP‐forming and non‐forming ends of metatarsals and in pisiforms of neonatal and postnatal mice. We first provide a comparison of Pthlh and Ihh expression between GP‐forming and non‐forming ends of the MTs using qRT‐PCR. Since these proteins act as diffusible morphogens, there is the potential that a quantitative difference in the expression may distinguish GP formation from direct ossification in these bones. Next, we assessed the spatial distribution of Pthlh , Pth1R , Ihh , and Ptch1 in developing metatarsals and pisiforms. Previous attempts have been hindered by the limited effectiveness of traditional in situ hybridization methods in postnatal and ossified tissues and due to the fact that protein detection with immunohistochemistry lacks the precision for identifying the sources of PTHrP and IHH in the GP 13 ; however, the RNAscope™ (ACDBio) technique for detecting mRNA expression in situ has been demonstrated to work in postnatal bone and cartilage samples. 18 , 19 , 20 We will test the following hypotheses: The accelerated differentiation and rapid loss of columnar chondrocytes during direct ossification reflect differences in the expression of Pthlh and/or Ihh between the GP‐forming and non‐forming ends of the metatarsal. The growth center identified in the pisiform is a true GP and thus shows the expression of a functional PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop. These experiments clarify the role of the PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop for GP specification and indicate that it is a mechanism to generate evolved differences in skeletal growth. 2 RESULTS 2.1 Total gene expression of Pthlh and Ihh in metatarsal ends We used qRT‐PCR to test for expression level differences in Pthlh and Ihh between GP formation and direct ossification in MTs. The proximal and distal cartilaginous ends were dissected from MTs at postnatal day zero (P0), P4, and P9. The MT3 was collected to represent the posterior MTs (rays II–V) where the GP forms distally, and the MT1 was collected because its GP forms proximally. For all three ages, distal MT3 shows significantly greater Pthlh expression than proximal MT3, supporting the hypothesis of a difference in expression between the GP‐forming and non‐forming ends of the metatarsal (Figure 2 ). However, there are no significant differences between proximal and distal ends for MT1. For Ihh expression, the only significant differences occurred at P9 when either GP‐forming end (distal MT3 and proximal MT1) was more highly expressed than in its non‐GP‐forming counterpart (Figure 2 ). FIGURE 2 qRT‐PCR of Pthlh (top) and Ihh (bottom) in P0, P4, and P9 MT3 and MT1 cartilages. Gene expression is relative to mouse lung tissue. Compare growth plate (gray bar) to non‐growth plate or direct ossification (white bar) for each MT. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean of three experiments on separate litters. Significance values are from paired t ‐tests (* p &lt; 0.05; ** p &lt; 0.01). The results from the MT3 suggest that the Pthlh expression is associated with the formation and function of GPs. The fact that multiple tissues express these genes in the epiphysis may explain the lack of difference for Pthlh in MT1. Thus, it is possible that there are differences in specific cellular populations that cannot be distinguished by qRT‐PCR on the complete samples. It is also possible that the maturation of the MT1 lags behind the MT3 and that differences manifest after P9. 2.2 In situ hybridization in the MT3 and MT1 To further investigate whether changes in Pthlh and Ihh were targeted to specific cellular populations, we assessed the spatial distribution of their expression using in situ hybridization. We also included Pth1r and Ptch1 (receptors for PTHrP and IHH, respectively) to determine whether GP formation and direct ossification affect cellular differentiation at the gene expression level. Expression was assessed at P0, P4, and P9 in both posterior MTs and MT1 for all genes. 2.3 Neonate ( P0 ) There is minimal difference in histological appearance between GP‐forming and direct ossification ends of the MTs (Figure 3 ). Both epiphyses are composed of round, undifferentiated chondrocytes, and each ossification front is preceded by separate zones of flattened, columnar, and hypertrophic chondrocytes. The only visual difference is a thickened perichondrial ring around the GP indicating the longitudinal growth of the cortical bone of the diaphysis. Consistent with our previous analysis, the height of each of the columnar and hypertrophic zones appears similar between each end of the posterior metatarsals. 10 FIGURE 3 Pthlh , Pth1r , Ihh , and Ptch1 expression in P0 metatarsals (MT). Posterior MTs are shown in left and center columns, and MT1 in right column. Pthlh (A–C) Expression (red staining) is observed in periarticular and perichondrial cells at both ends of the MTs; however, strong reserve zone staining only occurs on the growth plate‐forming end (red arrows). Pth1r (D–F) Expression is observed throughout the MT and is particularly strong in prehypertrophic and hypertrophic zones and in the bone collar (blue arrows). Ihh (G–I) Expression is restricted to the prehypertrophic and hypertrophic zones of both ends. Note that the depth of the prehypertrophic zone indicated by flattened Ihh ‐expressing cells is expanded during direct ossification (compare solid brackets). Ptch1 (J–L) Expression occurs in the round undifferentiated chondrocytes in the epiphysis, the columnar zone, the bone collar, and the primary center of ossification. During growth plate formation, expression appears restricted to the reserve zone with a sharp reduction of expression in more distal epiphyseal cells. During direct ossification, expression appears to extend further toward the articular surface (compare dashed brackets). All scale bars = 100 μm. In the distal end of the posterior MTs, Pthlh is detected in periarticular chondrocytes, in the perichondrium adjacent to the bone collar, and in a band of reserve zone chondrocytes distal to the proliferative columnar zone (Figure 3A ). Proximally, Pthlh is similarly detected in periarticular chondrocytes and the perichondrium, but a comparable zone of expression in the round reserve chondrocytes is not observed (Figure 3B ). A similar pattern is seen in the MT1, with Pthlh detected in articular regions and the perichondrium of both ends (Figure 3C ). There is a trend toward greater expression in reserve chondrocytes within the proximal end of MT1 adjacent to the future GP when compared to the distal end. Pth1r is strongly expressed throughout both ends of all MTs (Figure 3D–F ). Individual points of expression can be seen in nearly all epiphyseal and columnar chondrocytes. Staining becomes particularly intense in the prehypertrophic region. Strong expression is also observed in the perichondrium and periosteum and upon the cartilage spicules of the primary center of ossification. The bone collars of the GP ends can be distinguished from comparable regions of the non‐GP ends in both the posterior MTs and MT1 by the broader and more intense expression of Pth1r (Figure 3D,F ). Ihh expression is intense at either end of the MTs but largely limited to prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes (Figure 3G–I ). Expression is also detected within columnar chondrocytes adjacent to the perichondrium along the margin of the bone. The prehypertrophic zones indicated by Ihh expression appear expanded in the non‐GP end relative to the GP end (Figure 3G,H ). To confirm this, we measured the mid‐axis heights of the columnar zone (based on cellular appearance from the start of cellular flattening to the initiation of hypertrophy) and prehypertrophic zone (from the initiation of Ihh expression to the initiation of hypertrophy) in each end of MT3 (Figure 4A–D ). While there is no significant difference in the columnar zone height between the distal and proximal ends at P0, the non‐GP prehypertrophic region is significantly expanded relative to the GP‐forming end (Table 1 , Figure 4E ). In addition, the boundary between columnar and prehypertrophic chondrocytes (as determined by Ihh expression) is less uniform across the breadth of the MT during direct ossification. A similar pattern is potentially observed in MT1; however, its smaller size and earlier stage of development make detecting these subtle differences less definitive (Figure 3I ). FIGURE 4 Quantification of prehypertrophic and columnar zone heights in P0 and P4 MT3s. The linear measurements collected from specimens stained for Ihh expression are shown in (A) P0 distal, (B) P0 proximal, (C) P4 distal, and (D) P4 proximal MT3s. Prehypertrophic zone heights are light blue for the growth plate‐forming distal end and light green for the non‐growth plate‐forming proximal end. Columnar heights are dark blue (distal) and dark green (proximal) lines. (E) Plot of the average zone heights in P0 ( n = 5) and P4 ( n = 6) distal and proximal MT3. Results from paired t ‐tests comparing difference in zone heights between ends are shown (** p &lt; 0.01; *** p &lt; 0.001). Scale bars = 50 μm. TABLE 1 Mean, standard errors, and t ‐test results for prehypertrophic and columnar zone heights in specimens stained for Ihh expression. Prehypertrophic μm (SE) Between ends Columnar μm (SE) Between ends Age N Distal Proximal p ‐value Distal Proximal p ‐value P0 5 49.8 (4.42) 72.43 (7.01) 0.005 210.4 (3.69) 186.2 (12.48) ns P4 6 68.1 (3.85) 125.2 (8.30) 0.001 271.3 (11.24) 185.1 (12.27) 0.008 Between ages p ‐value 0.012 0.001 0.001 ns Note : Zone heights are compared between distal and proximal ends using a paired t ‐test and between ages using two‐sample t ‐tests (ns = non‐significant). Ptch1 is strongly expressed in multiple chondrocyte populations in either end of the MT (Figure 3J–L ). Expression is particularly intense in the columnar chondrocytes of both ends. In the GP end, Ptch1 is expressed in a broad region of round epiphyseal chondrocytes corresponding to the reserve zone, with a dramatic reduction in expression in the epiphyseal region beyond (Figure 3J ). During direct ossification, the region of expression in round undifferentiated chondrocytes is narrower, and the reduction of expression across the epiphysis is more gradual (Figure 3K ). The expression is also strong at either end of the primary center of ossification, but it is largely absent within the hypertrophic zone. 2.4 Postnatal Day 4 At P4, both ends of the metatarsal continue to preserve complete epiphyses composed of round undifferentiated chondrocytes adjacent to zones of columnar and hypertrophic chondrocytes (Figure 5 ). As previously described, the columnar and hypertrophic zones have begun to disorganize in the ends undergoing direct ossification. 10 FIGURE 5 Pthlh , Pth1r , Ihh , and Ptch1 expression in P4 metatarsals (MT). Organization is the same as in Figure 3 . Pthlh (A–C) Expression (red staining) continues in periarticular and perichondrial cells with strong reserve zone staining only seen in the growth plate end (red arrows). Pth1r (D–F) Expression is observed throughout the MT with strongest expression occurring in the organized prehypertrophic and hypertrophic zones and in the bone collar. Note that intense staining extends farther into the columnar zone during direct ossification (compare solid brackets). Ihh (G–I) Expression occurs in prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes of both ends. The prehypertrophic region continues to be expanded during direct ossification (compare dashed brackets) similar to Pth1r expression. Ptch1 (J–L) Expression occurs in periarticular, epiphyseal, and columnar chondrocytes and in the bone collar and primary center of ossification. There continues to be stark reduction in expression between reserve and epiphyseal chondrocytes in the growth plate end (yellow arrows) compared to direct ossification. All scale bars = 100 μm. Pthlh continues to be expressed in periarticular chondrocytes and in the perichondrium/periosteum lining the bone (Figure 5A–C ). In both the distal ends of posterior metatarsals and the proximal end of MT1, there is a distinct band of expression corresponding to the reserve chondrocytes adjacent to the columnar zone (Figure 5A,C ). While some faint expression remains in the epiphysis of distal MT1, no comparable band is detected in equivalent chondrocytes of the non‐GP‐forming end of posterior metatarsals (Figure 5B ). Pth1r is expressed throughout the epiphysis (Figure 5D–F ). The most intense expression occurs in the prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes of either end and in the bone collar of the GP‐forming end of posterior MTs. Interestingly, the boundary for the onset of Pth1r expression at the prehypertrophic zone can be distinguished between the distal and proximal ends of posterior MTs. In the GP‐forming end, the initiation of intense Pth1r expression is abrupt and produces a linear demarcation across the lower end of the columnar zone (Figure 5D ). In contrast, the increase in Pth1r expression is more gradual, forming a gradient extending across 9–10 columnar cell layers during direct ossification (Figure 5E ). In addition, the boundary is curved across the proximal MT, with central chondrocytes appearing to have stronger expression than those closer to the periphery. A further difference is observed in the consistency of Pth1r expression across the epiphysis. In the distal end, there is a dip in expression corresponding to the Pthlh ‐expressing reserve zone chondrocytes compared to adjacent columnar zone and distal epiphyseal chondrocytes closer to the articular zone (Figure 5D ). In the proximal end, there is a uniform level of Pth1r expression across the epiphysis (Figure 5E ). Ihh continues to be strongly expressed in both ends of the metatarsal, but the differences in the onset of expression have become more pronounced (Figure 5G–I ). In the GP‐forming end of both posterior MTs and the MT1, the well‐defined linear expression boundary between columnar and prehypertrophic chondrocytes remains with an earlier onset of expression adjacent to the bone collar (Figure 5G,I ). Minimal expression is observed in other columnar or epiphyseal chondrocytes of the GP‐forming end except for those closest to the articular region. During direct ossification, there is more variability in Ihh expression at the boundary between columnar and hypertrophic chondrocytes (Figure 4H ). This produces a more gradual gradient of expression, with onset occurring even in some round epiphyseal chondrocytes. There is an increase in the difference between the heights of the prehypertrophic zones in the GP and non‐GP ends due to an expansion of the proximal prehypertrophic region (Table 1 , Figure 4E ). This expansion in the proximal prehypertrophic zone occurs while the height of the proximal columnar zone remains unchanged between P0 and P4. Ptch1 expression continues to follow the pattern established at P0 (Figure 5J–L ). Expression is strong in the reserve and columnar zone chondrocytes and in the bone collar and the ossification front of the primary center. Expression is generally similar at either end of the posterior MTs and MT1. As in the pattern observed for Ihh , there is a more distinct difference in Ptch1 expression between reserve and epiphyseal chondrocytes in the GP‐forming ends (Figure 5J,L ). For direct ossification, there continues to be a more gradual gradient in Ptch1 as it approaches the articular chondrocytes (Figure 5K ). 2.5 Postnatal Day 9 The histological differences between the ends of the MTs are fully apparent at P9 (Figure 6 ). The GPs are established in both the posterior MTs and MT1, with well‐organized columnar and hypertrophic zones. Some cells in the distal epiphyses of the posterior MTs have begun to initiate hypertrophy in anticipation of the secondary center of ossification, but regions of round reserve chondrocytes remain above the columnar zone. On the direct ossification end, the columnar zone is completely obliterated, and the primary center of ossification is starting to invade the epiphysis whose chondrocytes have begun to undergo hypertrophy. FIGURE 6 Pthlh , Pth1r , Ihh and Ptch1 expression in P9 metatarsals (MT). Organization is the same as Figures 3 and 4 . Pthlh (A–C) Periarticular and perichondrial expression (red staining) continues to be shared by either end, while expression in the reserve zone clearly distinguishes the growth plate end from direct ossification (blue arrows). Pth1r (D–F) Expression is strong in the prehypertrophic and hypertrophic zones and the bone collar in the growth plate ends, and the forming secondary center of ossification is indicated by separate intense regions of expression in the epiphyses (orange arrows). During direct ossification, expression in prehypertrophic cells highlights the irregular differentiation of chondrocytes as the epiphysis is replaced by the primary center. Ihh (G–I) In the growth plate, expression occurs in an organized band of prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes, while in direct ossification, an irregular zone of prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes extends to the periarticular zone. Ptch1 (J–L) Growth plate expression occurs in organized periarticular, reserve, and columnar chondrocytes and in the bone collar and primary center of ossification but is reduced in epiphyseal and hypertrophic chondrocytes. The irregular front of differentiating prehypertrophic cells is apparent during direct ossification. Scale bars = 100 μm, except for C, F, I, and L which are 300 μm. In the GP‐forming ends of the posterior MTs and MT1, Pthlh is found in periarticular chondrocytes, the perichondrium/periosteum, and a clear band across the breadth of the MT corresponding to the reserve zone as seen in younger stages (Figure 6A,C ). During direct ossification, expression is also seen in the periarticular and perichondrial/periosteal cells, but little, if any, expression is observed within the epiphysis (Figure 6B,C ). A gradient of increasing Pth1r expression is observed along the columnar zone, peaking in prehypertrophic and early hypertrophic chondrocytes of the GP in both posterior digits and MT1 (Figure 6D,F ). Intense staining continues in the bone collar, periosteum, and ossification front. Pth1r is also observed in the epiphyseal chondrocytes undergoing hypertrophy in anticipation of secondary center of ossification formation. During direct ossification, Pth1r is observed along the irregular boundary of prehypertrophic and early hypertrophic chondrocytes (Figure 6E,F ). Pth1R is also expressed in the periosteum and primary center of ossification. Ihh continues to be localized to prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes of the GP, with a highly coordinated onset of expression across the columns (Figure 6G,I ). Some expression is also observed in central epiphyseal chondrocytes that initiate hypertrophy prior to the secondary center of ossification formation in posterior digits. In the non‐GP‐forming end of posterior MTs, expression is observed throughout the epiphysis as these chondrocytes have begun to undergo hypertrophy to be replaced during direct ossification (Figure 6H ). Ihh is yet to be expressed in the epiphyses of MT1, possibly due to the developmental delay of the first ray (Figure 5I ). Ptch1 continues to be strongly expressed in reserve and columnar GP chondrocytes, with positive staining also observed in the bone collar, perichondrium, and ossification front (Figure 6J,L ). Expression is reduced in the distal epiphysis beyond the reserve zone. During direct ossification, strong expression occurs in an irregular band of round chondrocytes that precedes the hypertrophic zone and in the initial boundary of the primary center of ossification adjacent to the articular zone (Figure 6K ). 2.6 Pisiform ossification The previous experiments demonstrate that the components of the PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop can be detected in postnatal skeletal tissues by in situ hybridization. This provides the opportunity to confirm whether the mammalian pisiform contains a true GP defined by the regulation of PTHrP and Ihh. We surveyed ossification at P0, P4, and P9. As previously described, the pisiform is in some ways developmentally delayed relative to the MTs, with ossification not occurring until after P4, but a GP and secondary center of ossification are still established by P9. 11 2.7 Postnatal Day 0 The neonate pisiform (P0) is composed entirely of round undifferentiated chondrocytes (Figure 7A,D,G,J ). There is a dorsal articular zone adjacent to the ulnar styloid process and triquetrum and at the opposite end a palmar insertion of the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon. There is no indication of cellular differentiation into columnar or hypertrophic chondrocytes or of a primary center of ossification. As such, the neonate pisiform is at an earlier developmental stage than the P0 MTs. Pthlh expression is minimal with individual positive cells observed at the palmar end near the tendonous insertion and in dorsal periarticular chondrocytes (Figure 7A ). No band of Pthlh expression in reserve chondrocytes comparable to that seen in MTs can be identified. In contrast, Pth1r is expressed throughout the cartilaginous pisiform, including periarticular chondrocytes, cells at the tendonous insertion, and round undifferentiated cells in the interior (Figure 7D ). Ihh expression is also low with a few individual Ihh ‐positive cells residing near the palmar tendonous insertion, similar to Pthlh (Figure 7G ). Ptch1 is expressed uniformly across the pisiform, similar to Pth1r (Figure 7J ). 2.8 Postnatal Day 4 The central portion of the pisiform is filled by an irregular zone of hypertrophic chondrocytes that extends to the dorsal periarticular zone by P4 (Figure 7B,E,H,K ). A region of round undifferentiated chondrocytes remains at the palmar end. Pthlh expression is now evident in both the dorsal periarticular zone and the connective tissue cells at the palmar tendinous insertion (Figure 7B 6B ). In addition, expression has expanded to include some of the round chondrocytes between the hypertrophic zone and the palmar end. Pth1r continues to be expressed throughout the pisiform, with greater intensity in the prehypertrophic and early hypertrophic chondrocytes at the center (Figure 7B ). On the dorsal end, the region of intense Pth1r expression nearly reaches the periarticular zone, while a larger region of undifferentiated chondrocytes remains at the palmar end. This pattern is confirmed by the expression of Ihh and Ptch1 (Figure 7H,K ). Both are highly expressed in the prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes that surround the site of the future primary center of ossification. 2.9 Postnatal Day 9 By P9, the central pisiform now consists of the primary center of ossification, which extends to the dorsal articular zone (Figure 7C,F,I,L , 6C,F,I,L ). The GP is also visible between the tendinous insertion and the primary center. Narrow columnar and hypertrophic zones preceding the palmar progression of the primary ossification center are present. In addition, cells at the palmar insertion also appear to undergo hypertrophy in anticipation of the secondary center of ossification. Pthlh is expressed in the round undifferentiated chondrocytes adjacent to the columnar zone, corresponding to the location of the reserve zone of the pisiform GP (Figure 7C , 6C ). Cells in the dorsal articular zone also express Pthlh . As we observed during MT ossification, Pth1r is expressed throughout the pisiform, with the strongest expression occurring in the prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes and within the primary center of ossification (Figure 7F ). Ihh is expressed in three distinct regions at P9 (Figure 7I ). On the dorsal margin, a narrow, curved band of Ihh expression precedes the primary center of ossification as it encroaches on the articular zone. At the palmar end, Ihh is expressed in small prehypertrophic and hypertrophic cells at the insertion of the flexor carpi ulnaris tendon. These cells indicate the future secondary center of ossification and epiphysis. The most prominent expression occurs in the prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes preceding the palmar front of the primary center of ossification running across the width of the pisiform. The onset of Ihh expression is very uniform, like that observed in the MT GPs, indicating tight coordination of columnar cell differentiation. Ptch1 is expressed broadly throughout the pisiform, but crucially it occurs in regions that are known to be responsive to Ihh signaling in the GP: (1) round reserve zone chondrocytes that secrete PTHrP, (2) columnar chondrocytes that increase proliferation, and cells in (3) the primary center of ossification and (4) bone collar that are stimulated to promote ossification (Figure 7L ). 3 DISCUSSION 3.1 Differential Pthlh expression in metatarsals This study takes advantage of natural variation in the ossification of the skeleton to better understand the role that the PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop plays in the specification of GP location. 10 , 13 The metatarsal is an example of an evolutionary loss of a GP prior to the radiation of therian mammals (marsupials and placentals). 21 This results in the rapid disorganization and premature differentiation of GP chondrocytes so that the primary center of ossification can invade and replace one of the cartilaginous epiphyses with bone. 10 This involved a shortening and loss of organization of the columnar and hypertrophic chondrocyte zones. Given the importance of the PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop for maintaining the pool of columnar chondrocytes and ensuring their synchronized differentiation to hypertrophy, we hypothesized that these distinct ossification pathways are mediated by changes to the expression of Pthlh , Ihh , or their receptors. In support of this hypothesis, we observed striking differences in Pthlh expression. Using qRT‐PCR, we identified a twofold–threefold greater expression in the distal versus proximal MT3 (Figure 2 ). In situ hybridization reveals this difference is due to the Pthlh expression in reserve chondrocytes above the columnar zone in GPs. No equivalent population is observed during direct ossification in posterior MTs of postnatal mice, even at P0 when the epiphyseal, columnar, and hypertrophic zones are visually similar in the distal and proximal ends. Therefore, we conclude that the loss of the proximal GP results from the absence of Pthlh expression in equivalent reserve zone chondrocytes. Unlike the MT3, qRT‐PCR could not detect a significant difference in Pthlh expression between the two ends of the MT1. The MT1 is developmentally delayed relative to posterior MTs, as its primary center of ossification is in its earliest stages of formation at P0. In situ hybridization does reveal strong Pthlh expression in the reserve zone of the proximal MT1 GP, as well as expression in the periarticular region and perichondrium of both ends. It is possible that the shared expression in the periarticular and perichondrial cells simply masked the targeted difference in the reserve zone when measured by qRT‐PCR. Alternatively, faint expression may still be detected in epiphyseal chondrocytes in the distal MT1. Some degree of remaining Pthlh expression may be due to the developmental delay of the MT1, or it could be the result of unique differences in the patterning of the first ray. Beyond the occurrence of its GP at the opposite end of other MTs, the anterior digit is defined developmentally by expressing only Hoxa13 and Hoxd13 during the second wave of Hox regulatory expression and the absence of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) during the anterior–posterior patterning of the autopod. 12 , 22 , 23 It is also the only ray to contain just three segments. 21 Its unique patterning may affect the degree to which PTHrP is eliminated from the direct ossifying end of the MT1. Interestingly, the first metapodial has a higher frequency of pseudoepiphysis formation than the other rays. 24 , 25 These are instances where the ossification front irregularly invades the epiphysis, leaving a narrow band of cartilage that can be confused with a GP. 24 Incomplete elimination of PTHrP from epiphyseal chondrocytes would be a potential mechanism to explain pseudoepiphyseal formation in metatarsals and metacarpals. Previous PTHrP loss‐of‐function experiments support this interpretation. Lanske and colleagues showed the effect of PTHrP loss of function on the ossification of embryonic phalanges, which typically only form active GPs at the proximal ends. 26 At E16.5, wild‐type phalanges possess distinct columnar regions flanking the initial hypertrophic zone at the site of the primary center, indicating it is at a similar stage of development as the P0 MT1. 10 In PTHrP−/− mice, the hypertrophic zone expands throughout the shaft of the E16.5 cartilaginous phalanx, and columnar organization is lost. 26 At E18.5, the WT distal phalanx maintains distinct zones of epiphyseal, columnar, and hypertrophic chondrocytes similar to the P0 posterior MTs. 10 However, in the PTHrP−/− distal phalanx, as well as in the major long bones of the limb, ossification is accelerated and resembles direct ossification, which typically occurs in postnatal MTs and phalanges. 26 , 27 , 28 This indicates that an embryonic period of PTHrP expression is necessary for the orderly replacement of the initial cartilage model. We hypothesize that the loss of Pthlh expression in the proximal MTs occurs late in the embryonic period in the posterior digits. Given the relatively delayed development of digit 1, it is likely we are still observing the latent Pthlh expression in the P0 and P4 distal MT1 necessary to produce an orderly bidirectional ossification of the cartilage model prior to GP formation. This targeted loss of Pthlh expression during the perinatal period allows for direct ossification to occur in the MT, metacarpals, and phalanges. While the unidirectional growth of these elements is the most extreme example, differential growth occurs at many sites throughout the skeleton. In general, the GPs of the proximal humerus, distal radius/ulna, distal femur, and proximal tibia account for a substantial majority of limb elongation in mammals. 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 It is tempting to hypothesize that these site‐specific differences in growth may be due to quantitative changes in postnatal Pthlh expression; however, there are numerous other pathways such as the growth hormone and insulin‐like growth factor axis that may also contribute to these differences. 36 The fact that Pthlh expression remains in the periarticular region and perichondrium demonstrates we are not witnessing a generalized change in gene expression potentially associated with metabolic differences in GP formation and direct ossification. Instead, the presence of Pthlh expression in the reserve zone and its loss preceding direct ossification is likely due to a specific regulatory change unique to that cell population. The existence of a pool of progenitor chondrocytes in the reserve zone has long been inferred based on the cellular kinematics within the GP. 2 Further experiments demonstrated that the reserve zone not only appears to be the source of GP chondrocytes but also is instrumental in producing its distinctive organization. 14 Abad and colleagues demonstrated through surgical manipulation of rabbit GPs that reserve chondrocytes not only have the capacity to generate proliferative columns, but they also influence the orientation of the columnar chondrocytes. 14 Recent work has used clonal cellular tracing to identify the chondroprogenitors and stem cell niche that reside within the reserve zone. 15 , 37 At the embryonic and neonatal periods, the reserve zone is composed of a population of chondroprogenitors (CP) that differentiate into columnar cells. 37 , 38 These are heavily recruited such that multiple differentiating reserve cells can contribute clones to individual columns, resulting in the depletion of the CP pool early in bone growth. However, coincident with the formation of secondary centers of ossification, a subset of this population differentiates into long‐term skeletal stem cells that both renew the reserve zone and contribute daughter cells that clonally expand to form entire columns within the GP. Mizuhashi et al. observed that Pthlh ‐expressing (PTHrP+) reserve zone cells also express cell‐surface markers characteristic of skeletal stem cell (SSC) and progenitor populations. 15 , 39 In addition, the PTHrP+ cells clonally expand and differentiate to directly seed the columnar chondrocytes, while a subset retains the ability to remain as long‐term skeletal stem cells throughout growth. 15 A separate population of FoxA2+ cells resides higher in the epiphysis and also has the characteristics of the chondrocyte stem cell niche. 40 A large proportion of these cells are fated to differentiate into the secondary center of ossification. However, a subpopulation of FoxA2+ cells remains in the upper regions of the reserve zone and is demonstrated to have long‐term skeletal stem cell potential. This pool may serve to repopulate the reserve zone with PTHrP+ cells throughout growth. 40 FIGURE 7 Pthlh , Pth1r , Ihh , and Ptch1 expression by in situ hybridization in the pisiform. Palmar is to the left and dorsal to the right in all images. (U) is the ulnar styloid process and (T) is the triquetrum. Pthlh : At P0, the pisiform is composed of undifferentiated round chondrocytes, and expression is only observed near the palmar insertion for the flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU, red arrow) and the dorsal articular surface (blue arrow). By P4, the central region has undergone hypertrophy and extends to the dorsal articular surface. At the palmar end, zones of reserve and columnar chondrocytes are preserved. Expression occurs in the reserve (red arrow) and periarticular (blue arrow) cells. At P9, the central region is invaded by the primary center, and a growth plate is maintained at the palmar end. Pthlh expression occurs in the reserve growth plate chondrocytes (red arrow), as well as the dorsal articular cells (blue arrow). Pth1r : Expression occurs throughout the pisiform at all three stages. At P0, expression remains diffuse in the undifferentiated chondrocytes. At P4, expression becomes intense in a ring of prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes that surround the primary center, and at P9, a band of strong expression occurs in the prehypertrophic and hypertrophic zones across the palmar end of the pisiform typical of growth plates. Ihh : At P0, expression is restricted to a small group of cells near the palmar tendinous insertion (orange arrow). At P4, expression occurs in the prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes at the primary center of ossification. With the formation of the growth plate by P9, the band of prehypertrophic expression across the pisiform is evident. Expression also occurs at the FCU insertion (orange arrow) and differentiating chondrocytes underlying the dorsal articular surface. Ptch1 : Diffuse expression occurs throughout the P0 pisiform. At P4, expression becomes more intense in chondrocytes prior to initiating hypertrophy. At P9, strong staining is seen in nearly all chondrocyte populations except for the band of hypertrophic cells in the growth plate. Strong staining also indicates the bone collar at the margin of the growth plate (black arrow). All scale bars = 100 μm. We hypothesize that the lack of Pthlh expression observed during direct ossification indicates the absence of the PTHrP+ CP population at these ends of the MTs (Figure 8 ). Their loss would have two effects. First, the lack of PTHrP allows columnar chondrocytes from the advancing ossification front to rapidly undergo hypertrophic differentiation; and second, the absence of a dedicated pool of CPs allows the wave of differentiating chondrocytes to advance unabated to the epiphysis. Loss of PTHrP signaling has long been known to affect GP formation. 27 , 28 Mice with ablated Pthlh or Pth1r genes have shortened, disorganized GPs due to accelerated differentiation of their proliferative chondrocytes. 3 , 41 While experiments with targeted deletion of Pthlh in postnatal GPs have yet to be completed, heterozygous knockout for Pthlh and partial ablation of PTHrP+ cells in postnatal day 6 (P6) GP result in shorter columnar zones and premature hypertrophic zones. 15 , 42 FIGURE 8 Differences in the PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop between growth plate formation and direct ossification. Pthlh expression in the PTHrP+ chondroprogenitor (CP) pool (blue shading) produces columnar chondrocytes that resist hypertrophic differentiation. With greater distance from the PTHrP+ pool, synchronous differentiation occurs as indicated by Ihh expression in prehypertrophic chondrocytes (red shading). The PTHrP+ population has been lost in the opposite end of postnatal MTs. This leads to both the inability of proliferating cells to resist the advance of chondrocyte differentiation and the absence of a signal coordinating chondrocyte hypertrophic differentiation and Ihh expression across the breadth of the MT. In our previous work using immunohistochemistry to identify differences in protein distribution, we found PTHrP to be generally distributed across the entire cartilaginous ends of the proximal and distal MTs. 13 Strongest immunostaining occurred in the periarticular chondrocytes, one of the locations Pthlh is expressed during embryonic and postnatal stages 7 , 43 and in prehypertrophic chondrocytes where PTH1R is located. This indicates that the secretion of PTHrP in periarticular and perichondrial chondrocytes does not serve to directly regulate GP formation or function. Therefore, targeted elimination of the pool of PTHrP+ CP is the likely mechanism to lose a GP from one of the ends of the mammalian MT. It is unclear at this time of the role of FoxA2+ cells in the loss of the PTHrP+ CP population prior to secondary center formation or in the direct ossification of the epiphysis. 3.2 Loss of PTHrP signaling affects Ihh and Ptch1 Experimental loss of the PTHrP+ CP cells results in the premature differentiation of columnar chondrocytes. 15 While the two ends of the MT initially look similar histologically, subtle differences in Ihh expression at P0 indicate that the loss of the PTHrP+ cell pool impacts columnar cell differentiation in the natural course of direct ossification. In the GP, the onset of Ihh expression is tightly coordinated across the breadth of the MT, while the timing of Ihh expression between columns is more irregular during direct ossification. This results in an expanded gradient of Ihh expression detectable at P0 and fully apparent at P4 that ultimately overtakes the epiphysis at P9. This is the expected effect that the lost reserve zone PTHrP+ cells would have during direct ossification based on previous experiments involving the loss of function of PTHrP signaling. 26 , 44 , 45 , 46 Differences in Ptch1 expression are also useful for tracking changes in chondrocyte differentiation between GP formation and direct ossification. Ptch1 is strongly expressed in columnar and reserve chondrocytes to increase the proliferative rate and PTHrP production, respectively. 5 , 6 , 7 The more expansive, though well‐defined, Ptch1 domain in the epiphysis of the GP‐forming end of the MT corresponds to the PTHrP+ CP pool. In contrast, there is a thinner, poorly organized region of round chondrocytes preceding the advance during direct ossification. Ptch1 is up‐regulated in response to hedgehog signaling. In its inactivated state, PTCH1 binds to smoothened (SMO), a transmembrane protein that transduces hedgehog signaling. When freed from PTCH1 after binding to a hedgehog protein, SMO stimulates (and/or inhibits) the GLI family of transcription factors. 47 However, PTCH1 is itself a target of GLI, and the increased production of PTCH1 serves to bind the free SMO to attenuate the hedgehog signal. Ectopic or modified expression of IHH leads to altered expression of Ptch1 in cartilaginous GPs and epiphyses. 46 Using mice carrying a hypomorphic allele of exostosin1 ( Ext1 ), Koziel and colleagues demonstrated the sensitivity of Ptch1 expression to a modulated IHH signal. 48 Mutations in Ext1 affect heparan sulfate synthesis in the cartilage matrix, which serves to increase the diffusion capacity of IHH proteins. This increased diffusion resulted in a distally expanded expression domain of Ptch1 in the epiphyses of embryonic radii. Thus, the consistently strong staining during direct ossification likely reflects increased Ihh signaling resulting from premature chondrocyte differentiation due to the loss of the PTHrP+ CP population (Figure 8 ). 3.3 PTHrP and Ihh in the pisiform We document for the first time the expression of Pthlh , Ihh , and their respective receptors in the pisiform GP. It has long been acknowledged that the pisiform forms from two centers of ossification. 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 We previously identified that these are separated by a cartilaginous zone histologically resembling a GP with a bone collar indicating longitudinal growth. 11 Here, we show that the preservation of this growth zone is associated with a similar PTHrP+ CP population in the reserve zone. As such, the mammalian pisiform preserves a GP with all the histological, kinematic, and genetic characteristics typical of GPs in long bones. Pisiform development is highly influenced by Hox gene expression. We previously demonstrated that the pisiform falls within the expression domains of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 and, like the long bones, loss of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 function results in altered GP formation. 12 In the shortened radius and ulna of Hoxa11−/− ; Hoxd11−/− mice, the expression of Ihh , Pthlh , and Pth1r is delayed and reduced. 53 Furthermore, Runx2 and short stature homeobox 2 ( Shox2 ) are not expressed, suggesting an inhibition on cartilage differentiation. 54 Mice with combined deletion of Hoxd11‐13 ( Hoxd [del11‐13] ) have delayed ossification in the metacarpals and metatarsals and increased expression of Gli3 , a negative regulator of Ihh expression. 55 These studies conclude that Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 play key roles in regulating chondrocyte columnar organization and differentiation through the expression of Ihh . 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 In light of the confirmation of the PTHrP+ CP population in the reserve zone, the lack of expression of Pthlh in the radius and ulna of Hoxa11−/− ; Hoxd11−/− mice takes on additional significance. 15 , 53 In wild‐type E15.5 radius and ulna using radiolabeled probes, Boulet and Capecchi documented strong periarticular and perichondrial Pthlh expression with faint internal expression potentially corresponding to reserve chondrocytes. 53 Thus, in addition to regulating chondrocyte differentiation through Ihh , GP formation may be influenced by Hox through the specification of the PTHrP+ CP population. We previously demonstrated that Hox genes have a direct effect on pisiform development and GP formation, and the greater sensitivity of the pisiform to single allele Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 loss of function makes it a good model to identify potential interactions between Hox and PTHrP. 11 , 12 This could provide important insights into how a GP is gained in the mammalian pisiform. However, the experimental loss of Pthlh expression in the periarticular and perichondrial regions in Hoxa11−/− ; Hoxd11−/− mice suggests that modification of Hox is not likely to be the mechanism for the targeted deletion of the PTHrP+ CP pool and loss of a GP in mammalian MTs and metacarpals. Humans, along with sloths, are among the few mammals to have shortened pisiforms with single centers of ossification. 11 , 58 , 59 The mechanisms differ between these taxa, as humans have lost the primary center of ossification, and sloths fail to form a secondary center. 58 , 59 However, both humans and sloths have likely undergone the loss or severe disorganization of the pisiform GP. This suggests that if the PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop is necessary for the functioning of the pisiform GP, then the dysregulation of Pthlh or Ihh could underlie pisiform reduction in these taxa. In addition, the presence of a single metapodial GP appears to be a trait specific to therian mammals, as alligators, turtles, birds, and potentially monotremes possess GPs at both ends of the bone. 21 Thus, the early disorganization and rapid differentiation of chondrocytes that occur during direct ossification may also reflect changes in Ihh , PTHrP , and their receptors. 4 CONCLUSIONS Here, we show that anatomical variation in GP location is associated with the presence of a functional PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop. While typical long bones preserve a pool of PTHrP+ chondroprogenitors at either end to define the location of their GPs, the MTs lose this population at one end, resulting in direct ossification of the epiphysis. Similarly, the existence of a PTHrP+ CP population is likely a feature gained by mammalian pisiforms to promote the longitudinal growth of these bones. We hypothesize that a PTHrP+ CP pool is a feature of all locations of prolonged endochondral growth in irregular bones such as the pelvis, scapulae, and vertebrae. However, it is unclear what the roles of PTHrP and Ihh are in the slower growth and surface remodeling of secondary centers within epiphyses. Natural variation in GP location in the MTs and pisiform has been useful for better understanding the roles of PTHrP and Ihh in patterning GPs. These models, in combination with next‐generation sequencing techniques, may shed light on the roles other factors have on GP specification and regulation. 5 EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES 5.1 Mouse specimens FVB/NJ mice were fed solid food and water ad libitum and exposed to a 14 h day/10 h night cycle. Mice were euthanized using CO 2 following protocols approved by the Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine IACUC (Protocol Numbers A20‐003 and A23‐001). Mice were collected on the day of birth or postnatal day 0 (P0), P4, and P9, and limbs were removed and processed for RNA extraction or histological analysis as described below. 5.2 Quantitative real‐time PCR Hindlimbs were collected from full litters (6–10 pups/litter) and immediately placed in ice‐cold RNA Protect (Qiagen). Dissection of MT1 and MT3 occurred under a dissecting microscope in cold RNA Protect. In each case except for P0 MT1, the translucent cartilage from each end was cut away from the opaque primary ossification center as observed through transmitted light from the microscope stage. In the P0 MT1, the primary center is not yet consistently present, so proximal and distal samples were divided at the midpoint. Each MT sample consisted of the complete cartilaginous ends of the MT3 and MT1, which included articular, reserve, columnar, and hypertrophic chondrocytes, as well as the perichondrium. Samples of distal MT3, proximal MT3, distal MT1, and proximal MT1 were pooled for the full litter and stored in RNA Protect. Total RNA was extracted and purified using the PureLink RNA Mini Kit with PureLink Dnase (Invitrogen) following standard protocol and a TissueLyser LT (Qiagen) homogenizer at 50 oscillations/s for 5 min. cDNA was synthesized using the ProScript II kit (NEB). Gene expression was assessed using the StepOnePlus RT‐PCR system with the SYBR Green Master reagent (Applied Biosystems). Axin1 was used as an internal control, and cartilage expression was normalized using lungs as a tissue control. Three technical replicates were used for each RT‐PCR run. Three biological replicates (separate litters) were run for each age and tissue. The same three litters were used for biological replicates for each age, except for P9, where 2 of 3 were the same. The primers used in qRT‐PCR were as follows: Axin1 ‐F: 5’‐AGTGATGCTGACACGCTATC‐3′; Axin1 ‐R: 5′‐GGTAAGTGCGAGGAATGTGAG‐3′; Pthlh ‐F: 5′‐GATTCCTACACAAGTCCCCAG‐3′; Pthlh ‐R: 5’‐GAATACCAGGACACTCCACTG‐3′; Ihh ‐F: 5′‐CCCAAATACAATCCCGACATC‐3′; and Ihh ‐R: 5′‐TCACCCGCAGTTTCACAC‐3′. 5.3 RNAscope Hindlimbs were collected at P0, P4, and P9. Samples were prepared by fixation in an RNase‐free preparation of 4% paraformaldehyde, decalcified in an RNase‐free preparation of Morse's solution (22.5% formic acid and 10% sodium citrate) for 24 h, and then embedded in paraffin following standard procedures. 60 We performed in situ hybridization (ISH) on paraffin‐embedded sections using RNAscope™ 2.5 HD Assay‐RED (ACD Bio) for parathyroid hormone‐like protein ( Pthrp , Catalog # 456521), parathyroid hormone 1 receptor ( Pth1r , Catalog # 426191), Indian hedgehog ( Ihh , Catalog # 413091), and patched 1 (Ptch1 , Catalog # 402811) following RNAscope™ standard protocol using RNAscope™ 2.5 HD Detection Reagents‐RED (Catalog # 322360), Wash Buffer Reagents (Catalog # 310091), and Hydrogen Peroxide (Catalog # 322335), except replacing standard antigen retrieval processes with an RNAscope™ proprietary antigen retrieval enzyme for bone and cartilage tissue (30 min at 40°C). Specimens were counterstained 10% Gill's No. 1 hematoxylin (StatLab, Catalog # HXGHE1LT) for 2 min. All observations on gene expression were based on at least three different samples from separate RNAscope runs. Images were collected using a Motic Easy Scan digital slide scanner, captured using Motic Digital Slide Assistant (VM 3.0), and balanced using Auto Tone in Photoshop (version 23.2.2). 5.4 Statistical analysis For each RT‐PCR experiment, the mean Pthlh or Ihh ∆Ct values standardized to Axin1 were calculated from the three technical replicates for each (∆∆Ct). Each gene's ∆∆Ct values were standardized to its expression in lung tissue (RQ). The biological replicates were used to perform two‐tailed paired t ‐tests to compare the ∆Ct values of distal and proximal MT3 and proximal and distal MT1, respectively (SPSS Version 28). RQ values were graphed using Prism (Version 10). The heights of the prehypertrophic and columnar zones in the P0 and P4 MT3 were measured in sections stained for Ihh expression using RNAscope. Metrics were collected using the Motic Digital Slide Assistant linear measurement tool on sections containing the full length of the MT3 to ensure that the linear dimensions were parallel to the long axis of the bone. The means from measurements collected on three different sections on each slide were computed as the values for each specimen. Five separate specimens were measured for P0 and 6 for P4. Differences in zone height between distal and proximal ends were assessed by two‐tailed paired t ‐tests, and two‐sample t ‐tests were used to assess differences between ages (P0 vs. P4) (SPSS). Graphs of zone heights were made using SPSS. CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors declare no conflicts of interest. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Doug Menke and Chris Hammond for their help with qRT‐PCR experiments and Jacquelyn Gerhart, the director of the PCOM Microimaging Facility, for histological support. Natalie Yoshioka and Danielle Rux kindly provided assistance with RNAscope. This research was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation (IOS‐1656315 and BCS‐1638812). We thank Walter Horton, Owen Lovejoy, and Denise McBurney for advice and assistance with previous stages of this project. We are indebted to the efforts of Emily Schuetz, Sabrina Kistler, Daved Farad, Mallory Stubblebine, and the other members, past and present, of the Reno and Kjosness Labs. 1 Because the hands and feet are reversed across the medial and lateral axis, we use the embryological terms anterior to refer to MT1 and posterior for MT2‐5 for consistency between the forelimb and hind limb. DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT All data presented or discussed in this study will be provided upon request. REFERENCES 1 Kronenberg HM . Developmental regulation of the growth plate . Nature . 2003 ; 423 ( 6937 ): 332 ‐ 336 . doi: 10.1038/nature01657 12748651 2 Hunziker EB . Mechanism of longitudinal bone growth and its regulation by growth plate chondrocytes . Microsc Res Tech . 1994 ; 28 : 505 ‐ 519 . doi: 10.1002/jemt.1070280606 7949396 3 Lanske B , Karaplis AC , Lee K , et al. PTH/PTHrP receptor in early development and Indian hedgehog‐regulated bone growth . Science . 1996 ; 273 ( 5275 ): 663 ‐ 666 . doi: 10.1126/science.273.5275.663 8662561 4 Vortkamp A , Lee K , Lanske B , Serge GV , Kronenberg HM , Tabin CJ . Regulation of rate of cartilage differentiation by Indian hedgehog and PTH‐related protein . Science . 1996 ; 273 : 613 ‐ 622 . doi: 10.1126/science.273.5275.613 8662546 5 Karp SJ , Schipani E , St‐Jacques B , Hunzelman J , Kronenberg H , McMahon AP . Indian hedgehog coordinates endochondral bone growth and morphogenesis via parathyroid hormone related‐protein‐dependent and ‐independent pathways . Development . 2000 ; 127 ( 3 ): 543 ‐ 548 . doi: 10.1242/dev.127.3.543 10631175 6 Kobayashi T , Soegiarto DW , Yang Y , et al. Indian hedgehog stimulates periarticular chondrocyte differentiation to regulate growth plate length independently of PTHrP . J Clin Invest . 2005 ; 115 ( 7 ): 1734 ‐ 1742 . doi: 10.1172/JCI24397 15951842 PMC1143590 7 St‐Jacques B , Hammerschmidt M , McMahon AP . Indian hedgehog signaling regulates proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes and is essential for bone formation . Genes Dev . 1999 ; 13 ( 16 ): 2072 ‐ 2086 . doi: 10.1101/gad.13.16.2072 10465785 PMC316949 8 Minina E , Kreschel C , Naski MC , Ornitz DM , Vortkamp A . Interaction of FGF, Ihh/Pthlh, and BMP signaling integrates chondrocyte proliferation and hypertrophic differentiation . Dev Cell . 2002 ; 3 Journal Article: 439 ‐ 449 . doi: 10.1016/S1534-5807(02)00261-7 12361605 9 Lacroix L . The Organization of Bones . The Blakiston Company ; 1951 . 10 Reno PL , McBurney DL , Lovejoy CO , Horton WE . Ossification of the mouse metatarsal: differentiation and proliferation in the presence/absence of a defined growth plate . Anat Rec . 2006 ; 288A ( 1 ): 104 ‐ 118 . doi: 10.1002/ar.a.20268 16342215 11 Kjosness KM , Hines JE , Lovejoy CO , Reno PL . The pisiform growth plate is lost in humans and supports a role for Hox in growth plate formation . J Anat . 2014 ; 225 ( 5 ): 527 ‐ 538 . 25279687 10.1111/joa.12235 PMC4292754 12 Reno PL , Kjosness KM , Hines JE . The role of Hox in pisiform and calcaneus ossification and the nature of the zeugopod/autopod boundary . J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol . 2016 ; 326 : 303 ‐ 321 . doi: 10.1002/jez.b.22688 27507801 13 Kjosness KM , Reno PL . Using comparisons between species and anatomical locations to discover mechanisms of growth plate patterning and differential growth . In: Percival CJ , Richtsmeier JT , eds. Building Bones: Bone Formation and Development in Anthropology. Cambridge Studies in Biological and Evolutionary Anthropology . Cambridge University Press ; 2017 : 205 ‐ 232 . doi: 10.1017/9781316388907.010 14 Abad V , Meyers JL , Weise M , et al. The role of the resting zone in growth plate chondrogenesis . Endocrinology . 2002 ; 143 ( 5 ): 1851 ‐ 1857 . doi: 10.1210/endo.143.5.8776 11956168 15 Mizuhashi K , Ono W , Matsushita Y , et al. Resting zone of the growth plate houses a unique class of skeletal stem cells . Nature . 2018 ; 563 ( 7730 ): 254 ‐ 258 . doi: 10.1038/s41586-018-0662-5 30401834 PMC6251707 16 Orikasa S , Matsushita Y , Fogge M , et al. Growth plate resting zone chondrocytes acquire transient clonal competency upon hedgehog activation and efficiently transform into trabecular bone osteoblasts . bioRxiv . 2023.05.31.543069. doi: 10.1101/2023.05.31.543069 17 Yang L , Tsang KY , Tang HC , Chan D , Cheah KSE . Hypertrophic chondrocytes can become osteoblasts and osteocytes in endochondral bone formation . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 2014 ; 111 ( 33 ): 12097 ‐ 12102 . doi: 10.1073/pnas.1302703111 25092332 PMC4143064 18 Rux D , Helbig K , Koyama E , Pacifici M . Hox11 expression characterizes developing zeugopod synovial joints and is coupled to postnatal articular cartilage morphogenesis into functional zones in mice . Dev Biol . 2021 ; 477 : 49 ‐ 63 . doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2021.05.007 34010606 PMC8277736 19 Rogers‐DeCotes AW , Porto SC , Dupuis LE , Kern CB . ADAMTS5 is required for normal trabeculated bone development in the mandibular condyle . Osteoarthr Cartil . 2021 ; 29 ( 4 ): 547 ‐ 557 . doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2021.01.005 PMC8759092 33561540 20 Reyes M , Firat D , Hanna P , et al. Substantially delayed maturation of growth plate chondrocytes in “humanized” PTH1R mice with the H223R mutation of Jansen's disease . JBMR Plus . 2023 ; 7 ( 10 ): e10802 . doi: 10.1002/jbm4.10802 37808400 PMC10556264 21 Reno PL , Horton WE Jr , Lovejoy CO . Metapodial or phalanx? An evolutionary and developmental perspective on the homology of the first ray's proximal segment . J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol . 2013 ; 320 ( 5 ): 276 ‐ 285 . doi: 10.1002/jez.b.22506 23640850 22 Harfe BD , Scherz PJ , Nissim S , Tian H , McMahon AP , Tabin CJ . Evidence for an expansion‐based temporal Shh gradient in specifying vertebrate digit identities . Cell . 2004 ; 118 ( 4 ): 517 ‐ 528 . doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2004.07.024 15315763 23 Reno PL , McCollum MA , Cohn MJ , Meindl RS , Hamrick M , Lovejoy CO . Patterns of correlation and covariation of anthropoid distal forelimb segments correspond to Hoxd expression territories . J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol . 2008 ; 310 ( 3 ): 240 ‐ 258 . doi: 10.1002/jez.b.21207 18080316 24 Ogden JA , Ganey TM , Light TR , Belsole RJ , Greene TL . Ossification and pseudoepiphysis formation in the “nonepiphyseal” end of bones of the hand and feet . Skeletal Radiol . 1994 ; 23 : 3 ‐ 13 . doi: 10.1007/BF00203694 8160033 25 Haines RW . The pseudoepiphysis of the first metacarpal of man . J Anat . 1974 ; 117 ( 1 ): 145 ‐ 158 . 4844656 PMC1231440 26 Lanske B , Amling M , Neff L , Guiducci J , Baron R , Kronenberg HM . Ablation of the PTHrP gene or the PTH/PTHrP receptor gene leads to distinct abnormalities in bone development . J Clin Invest . 1999 ; 104 ( 4 ): 399 ‐ 407 . doi: 10.1172/JCI6629 10449432 PMC408525 27 Karaplis AC , Luz A , Glowacki J , et al. Lethal skeletal dysplasia from targeted disruption of the parathyroid hormone‐related peptide gene . Genes Dev . 1994 ; 8 ( 3 ): 277 ‐ 289 . doi: 10.1101/gad.8.3.277 8314082 28 MacLean HE , Guo J , Knight MC , Zhang P , Cobrinik D , Kronenberg HM . The cyclin‐dependent kinase inhibitor p57(Kip2) mediates proliferative actions of PTHrP in chondrocytes . J Clin Invest . 2004 ; 113 ( 9 ): 1334 ‐ 1343 . 15124025 10.1172/JCI21252 PMC398433 29 Digby KH . The measurement of diaphysial growth in proximal and distal directions . J Anat Physiol . 1915 ; 5 : 187 ‐ 188 . PMC1289069 17233059 30 Payton CG . The growth in length of the long bones in the madder‐fed pig . J Anat . 1932 ; 66 : 414 ‐ 425 . 17104383 PMC1248943 31 Payton CG . The position of the nutrient foramen and direction of the nutrient canal in the long bones of the madder‐fed pig . J Anat . 1934 ; 68 : 500 ‐ 510 . 17104499 PMC1249005 32 Bisgard JD , Bisgard ME . Longitudinal growth of long bones . Arch Surg . 1935 ; 31 : 569 ‐ 587 . 33 Gill GG , Abbott LRC . Practical method of predicting the growth of the femur and tibia in the child . Arch Surg . 1942 ; 45 : 286 ‐ 315 . 34 Pritchett JW . Longitudinal growth and growth‐plate activity in the lower extremity . Clin Orthop Relat Res . 1992 ; 275 : 274 ‐ 279 . 1735225 35 Reno PL , McCollum MA , Lovejoy CO , Meindl RS . Adaptationism and the anthropoid postcranium: selection does not govern the length of the radial neck . J Morphol . 2000 ; 246 ( 2 ): 59 ‐ 67 . 11074575 10.1002/1097-4687(200011)246:2&lt;59::AID-JMOR2&gt;3.0.CO;2-G 36 Serrat MA , Lovejoy CO , King D . Age‐ and site‐specific decline in insulin‐like growth factor‐I receptor expression is correlated with differential growth plate activity in the mouse hindlimb . Anat Rec . 2007 ; 290 ( 4 ): 375 ‐ 381 . 10.1002/ar.20480 17514762 37 Newton PT , Li L , Zhou B , et al. A radical switch in clonality reveals a stem cell niche in the epiphyseal growth plate . Nature . 2019 ; 567 ( 7747 ): 234 ‐ 238 . doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-0989-6 30814736 38 Chagin AS , Newton PT . Postnatal skeletal growth is driven by the epiphyseal stem cell niche: potential implications to pediatrics . Pediatr Res . 2020 ; 87 ( 6 ): 986 ‐ 990 . doi: 10.1038/s41390-019-0722-z 31830758 PMC7196937 39 Chan CKF , Seo EY , Chen JY , et al. Identification and specification of the mouse skeletal stem cell . Cell . 2015 ; 160 ( 1‐2 ): 285 ‐ 298 . doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.12.002 25594184 PMC4297645 40 Muruganandan S , Pierce R , Teguh DA , et al. A FoxA2+ long‐term stem cell population is necessary for growth plate cartilage regeneration after injury . Nat Commun . 2022 ; 13 ( 1 ): 2515 . doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-30247-1 35523895 PMC9076650 41 Amizuka N , Warshawsky H , Henderson JE , Goltzman D , Karaplis AC . Parathyroid hormone‐related peptide‐depleted mice show abnormal epiphysial cartilage development and altered endochondral formation . J Cell Biol . 1994 ; 126 ( 6 ): 1611 ‐ 1623 . doi: 10.1083/jcb.126.6.1611 8089190 PMC2290963 42 Amizuka N , Henderson JE , Hoshi K , et al. Programmed cell death of chondrocytes and aberrant chondrogenesis in mice homozygous for parathyroid hormone‐related peptide gene deletion . Endocrinology . 1996 ; 137 ( 11 ): 5055 ‐ 5067 . doi: 10.1210/endo.137.11.8895380 8895380 43 Lee K , Lanske B , Karaplis AC , et al. Parathyroid hormone‐related peptide delays terminal differentiation of chondrocytes during endochondral bone development . Endocrinology . 1996 ; 137 ( 11 ): 5109 ‐ 5118 . doi: 10.1210/endo.137.11.8895385 8895385 44 Amizuka N , Karaplis AC , Henderson JE , et al. Haploinsufficiency of parathyroid hormone‐related peptide (PTHrP) results in abnormal postnatal bone development . Dev Biol . 1996 ; 175 ( 1 ): 166 ‐ 176 . doi: 10.1006/dbio.1996.0104 8608863 45 Amizuka N , Henderson JE , White JH , et al. Recent studies on the biological action of parathyroid hormone (PTH)‐related peptide (PTHrP) and PTH/PTHrP receptor in cartilage and bone . Histol Histopathol . 2000 ; 15 ( 3 ): 957 ‐ 970 . doi: 10.14670/HH-15.957 10963138 46 Chung UI , Lanske B , Lee K , Li E , Kronenberg H . The parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone‐related peptide receptor coordinates endochondral bone development by directly controlling chondrocyte differentiation . Proc Natl Acad Sci . 1998 ; 95 ( 22 ): 13030 ‐ 13035 . doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.22.13030 9789035 PMC23697 47 McMahon AP . More surprises in the hedgehog signaling pathway . Cell . 2000 ; 100 ( 2 ): 185 ‐ 188 . doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81555-X 10660040 48 Koziel L , Kunath M , Kelly OG , Vortkamp A . Ext1‐dependent heparan sulfate regulates the range of Ihh signaling during endochondral ossification . Dev Cell . 2004 ; 6 ( 6 ): 801 ‐ 813 . doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2004.05.009 15177029 49 Retterer ME . De l'ossification du Pisiforme de l'homme, du chien et du lapin . C R Soc Biol . 1898 ; 50 : 435 ‐ 439 . 50 Harris HA . The pisiform bone . Nature . 1944 ; 153 : 715 . 51 Eckstein FM . The pisiform bone . Nature . 1944 ; 154 : 182 . 52 Haines RW , Hughes H . The pisiform bone . Nature . 1944 ; 154 : 181 ‐ 182 . 53 Boulet AM , Capecchi MR . Multiple roles of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 in the formation of the mammalian forelimb zeugopod . Development . 2004 ; 131 ( 2 ): 299 ‐ 309 . doi: 10.1242/dev.00936 14668414 54 Gross S , Krause Y , Wuelling M , Vortkamp A . Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 regulate chondrocyte differentiation upstream of Runx2 and Shox2 in mice . PLoS One . 2012 ; 7 ( 8 ): e43553 . doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043553 22916278 PMC3423364 55 González‐Martín MC , Mallo M , Ros MA . Long bone development requires a threshold of Hox function . Dev Biol . 2014 ; 392 ( 2 ): 454 ‐ 465 . doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.004 24930703 56 Hilton MJ , Gutiérrez L , Martinez DA , Wells DE . EXT1 regulates chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation during endochondral bone development . Bone . 2005 ; 36 ( 3 ): 379 ‐ 386 . doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2004.09.025 15777636 57 Koziel L , Wuelling M , Schneider S , Vortkamp A . Gli3 acts as a repressor downstream of Ihh in regulating two distinct steps of chondrocyte differentiation . Development . 2005 ; 132 ( 23 ): 5249 ‐ 5260 . doi: 10.1242/dev.02097 16284117 58 Kjosness KM , Reno PL . Identifying the homology of the short human pisiform and its lost ossification center . EvoDevo . 2019 ; 10 ( 1 ): 32 . doi: 10.1186/s13227-019-0145-2 31788181 PMC6876086 59 Gavazzi LM , Kjosness KM , Reno PL . Ossification pattern of the unusual pisiform in two‐toed (Choloepus) and three‐toed sloths (Bradypus) . Anat Rec . 2022 ; 305 ( 7 ): 1804 ‐ 1819 . doi: 10.1002/ar.24832 34779120 60 de Charleroy C , Haseeb A , Lefebvre V . Preparation of adult mouse skeletal tissue sections for RNA in situ hybridization . Methods Mol Biol . 2021 ; 2245 : 85 ‐ 92 . doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1119-7_6 33315196 PMC9063681 