 203 ajhg American Journal of Human Genetics Am J Hum Genet Elsevier PMC12824620 12824620 12824620 41512838 10.1016/j.ajhg.2025.12.006 Functional analysis of NPR2 variants supports the therapeutic rationale for CNP in short stature Jeong Raehoon 1 2 Covarrubias Sergio 1 2 Shanghavi Devanshi 1 Ruhrmund Donald 1 Estrada Karol 1 3 Zhou Dejie 1 Marom Nofar 1 4 Bauer Christopher R 1 ∗ Froelich Steven 1 1 Research and Early Development, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., San Rafael, CA 94901, USA ∗ Corresponding author christopher.bauer@bmrn.com 2 These authors contributed equally 3 Present address: Research, Maze Therapeutics, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA 4 Present address: Research, Site Therapeutics, San Francisco, CA 94129, USA 8 1 2026 113 1 117 117–132 23 1 2026 © 2025 The Author(s) This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). Summary Human height is a complex trait regulated by genetic and environmental factors. Several components of chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation regulatory pathways are implicated in short-stature disorders; one such component is natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (NPR2), the receptor for C-type natriuretic peptide. We developed a high-throughput GFP reporter assay to evaluate the functional impact of NPR2 missense variants on receptor activity, which was utilized alongside a commercially available CatchPoint assay, and previously published data. Measurements from these sources were integrated and annotated, providing an “activity score” for each variant, based on reduced or increased receptor activity. Unlike variant effect prediction tools that assign scores from benign to pathogenic, our method enabled us to distinguish loss-of-function and gain-of-function variants, categorizing 245 NPR2 missense variants, including 47 loss-of-function, 34 partial loss-of-function, and 14 gain-of-function variants, across the functional domains of NPR2. Activity scores showed a near-linear association with standing height (Pearson’s correlation R 2 = 0.438, p = 5.8 × 10 −10 ), with the effects additive and apparent across polygenic backgrounds. Moreover, phenome-wide association analysis demonstrated that NPR2 activity was significantly associated only with height and height-associated traits, suggesting that modulating NPR2 activity may modulate height only. To summarize, the relationship between NPR2 activity and height resembles a dimmer switch, whereby subtle variations in activity cause subtle variations in height. We demonstrate the therapeutic potential of modulating NPR2 activity in short-stature conditions, owing to both its strong association with height and its lack of association with traits unrelated to height. Keywords: achondroplasia, short stature, height, C-type natriuretic peptide, CNP, natriuretic peptide receptor B, NPR2, variant characterization, high throughput, functional activity/assay, genetic, variant of unknown significance, VUS, missense variants Graphical abstract Loss-of-function variants in NPR2 are associated with short-stature disorders. A high-throughput GFP reporter assay classified functional activity of NPR2 missense variants, revealing a near-linear association between activity level and standing height, demonstrating the potential value in modulating NPR2 in short-stature conditions. status released display-pdf yes is-olf no is-manuscript no is-preprint no is-journal-matter no is-scanned no is-retracted no Received 2025 Sep 9; Accepted 2025 Dec 8; Issue date 2026 Jan 8. Introduction Epidemiological and observational studies have reported that height and growth are associated with a range of health outcomes in adulthood, including development of type 2 diabetes (MIM: 125853 ); some types of cancer; and bone, cardiac, and respiratory issues. 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 Human height is a model complex trait, influenced by a combination of many factors. 5 Although these factors include environmental and nutritional components, 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 the majority of variation in height in modern populations (approximately 80%) is determined by genetics. 2 , 11 , 12 Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified thousands of independent or near-independent genetic variants associated with adult height. 6 , 7 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 Additionally, rare-variant association studies have found dozens of additional genes harboring variants that can have a substantial impact on an individual’s final adult height. 19 , 20 One key regulator of human height that has been identified by genetics is NPR2 (MIM: 108961 ), which encodes natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (NPR2). 6 , 21 NPR2 is expressed in growth plate cartilage, among other tissues, and regulates endochondral ossification and long bone growth through control of chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation. 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 NPR2 is a member of the natriuretic peptide receptor family and possesses an extracellular ligand-binding domain, a single transmembrane region, a kinase homology domain, and an intracellular domain with guanylyl cyclase (GC) catalytic activity. 22 , 23 , 24 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 Structural analysis indicates that the GC catalytic domain of NPR2 forms an obligate dimer, with each monomer contributing to the two symmetric active sites at the dimer interface. 22 , 27 , 28 NPR2 is a receptor for C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) and exhibits the highest affinity for CNP among the natriuretic peptide receptors. 22 Binding of CNP to the extracellular domain of NPR2 induces a conformational change in the receptor, activating the GC catalytic site and leading to conversion of guanosine triphosphate to the secondary messenger cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). 22 , 24 cGMP interacts with the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway to block the inhibitory effects of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) on chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation, which is mediated by this pathway. Thus, when cGMP is generated by CNP binding to NPR2, chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation are promoted. 23 , 25 , 27 , 31 The extent to which CNP may contribute to regulation of height is illustrated by studies of CNP analogs in people with growth disorders. Randomized trials of the CNP analog vosoritide (BMN 111) in individuals with achondroplasia (ACH [MIM: 100800 ]) and hypochondroplasia (HCH [MIM: 146000 ]) have shown that stimulation of the CNP pathway can increase height, 32 , 33 indicating the therapeutic benefits of targeting this pathway and highlighting the need to understand factors that affect its activity. Multiple GWASs have found common variants associated with NPR2 as well as several other genes in the pathways regulating chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation, such as FGFR3 (encoding FGF receptor 3 [MIM: 134934 ]) and NPPC (encoding CNP [MIM: 600296 ]), which lead to subtle variations in height. 6 , 7 , 16 , 18 , 27 In contrast, some rare variants in NPR2 appear to have a much greater influence on height and have been linked to the risk of both idiopathic short stature and extremely tall stature. 34 Further analyses based on integration of GWASs, exome-wide associations, and Mendelian disorders highlight the bidirectional effects of NPR2 owing to the presence of both loss-of-function (LoF) and gain-of-function (GoF) variants. 21 Heterozygous LoF variants in NPR2 have been identified in multiple families with short stature. 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 40 , 41 These rare variants result in a severe growth deficit, with some affected individuals exhibiting height Z scores between −2 and −4 lower than individuals with wild-type (WT) NPR2 . 34 , 38 , 39 , 40 Compound heterozygous or homozygous NPR2 variants that abolish receptor function completely cause a more severe skeletal dysplasia, known as acromesomelic dysplasia 1 (AMD1 [MIM: 602875 ]). 24 , 38 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 Individuals with AMD1 have severe disproportionate short stature, with height Z scores lower than −5, alongside other skeletal abnormalities, such as short hands and feet and facial dysmorphism. 24 , 47 These LoF mutations exert their effects through a range of mechanisms, altering subcellular trafficking of the NPR2 receptor as well as CNP binding and GC catalytic activity; there are also dominant-negative impacts through the interaction of variant NPR2 with WT NPR2 during dimer formation. 35 , 37 , 38 , 47 , 48 In contrast, extremely tall stature (individuals with height Z scores ≥2) has been linked to missense variants in NPR2 that increase signaling through a mechanism thought to increase GC activity. 29 , 49 , 50 Given the height variability associated with different NPR2 variants and their combinations into homozygous, heterozygous, and compound heterozygous genotypes, an understanding of their potential molecular effects would assist in assessing how NPR2 variants exert their influence on height across the general population. In this article, we describe a high-throughput functional screening assay to characterize the activity of hundreds of missense variants in NPR2 that were observed in the UK Biobank, a large-scale, comprehensive biomedical database and research resource providing de-identified genetic and health information and biological samples from 500,000 individuals in the UK. 51 
 NPR2 variants identified in UK Biobank samples were analyzed using a fluorescent cGMP reporter assay in HEK293T cells, which quantitatively measured NPR2 receptor activity in response to CNP stimulation. These data were examined alongside participant health information to fulfill our objective of further elucidating NPR2-based mechanisms underlying determination of height. 25 Material and methods Vector and cell line construction The cGMP-GFP-on reporter vector was created by subcloning the cGull insert, 52 into a custom lentiviral vector (VectorBuilder, Neu-Isenburg, Germany), with cGull expression driven by the cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter and blasticidin resistance driven by the mouse phosphoglycerate kinase 1 promoter. The lentiviral NPR2 -expressing construct was prepared by subcloning with PspXI/NotI into a custom bidirectional vector that expressed puro-T2A-BFP in the reverse direction (Azenta Life Sciences, MA, USA). 53 The HEK293 cGMP-GFP-on reporter cell line was generated by transducing HEK293T p11 cells with cGMP-GFP reporter vector (multiplicity of infection [MOI] = 0.2), followed by blasticidin selection (10 μg/mL) for 4 days (VectorBuilder). Cells were assessed by transfection with WT NPR2 -expressing vector, incubation with 800 nM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (a phosphodiesterase 5A inhibitor) for 15 min, and stimulation with 50 nM CNP for 1 h. Fluorescence was assessed by flow cytometry (Attune Flow Cytometer; Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Barcode synthesis and next-generation sequencing primers A 20-bp randomer barcode sequence with >10 9 complexity was constructed and cloned into the PmeI site of the NPR2 vector (GENEWIZ; Azenta Life Sciences). Primers ( Table 1 ) and the next-generation sequencing (NGS) pipeline for barcode sequencing were designed and executed, respectively, by Cellecta (CA, USA) using their standard library processing protocol ( https://manuals.cellecta.com/crispr-pooled-lentiviral-sgrna-libraries/v3a/en/topic/large-scale-genomic-dna-extraction-protocol ), along with the custom amplification and sequencing primers in Table 1 . Table 1 Primers Primer Sequence (5′ to 3′) Fwd-NPR2-98539 5'-TGTCTGGATCTCAAATCCCTCGGA-3' Rev-NPR2-98539 5'-AGGAAAGATGCGAACATACTGGCT-3' P5-NFwd-NPR2-98539 5'-AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACGTCATCGAATTCCTGCAGCC-3' P7-NRev-NPR2-98539-IND-A 5'-CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATGCACGACGAGACGCAGACGA-3' ATACGACAGAGCTGGCTCTTAGGAGAGCGGA FSeq-NPR2-98539-BC 5'-AGCTCAGTTAGCCTCCCCCATCTCTCGGTTTAAAC-3' Cloning of NPR2 variants and PacBio association of barcodes to variants One hundred and fifty-four NPR2 variants were selected from the UK Biobank ( https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/ ; Table S1 ). 51 Reference sequences for variant descriptions are GenBank: NM_003995.4 and NP_003986.2 . Variants were selected based on an apparent effect size on height >1 standard deviation (SD) from the mean or presence in >1 individual in firstly the 50K exome release of the UK Biobank and, subsequently, the 200K release. Other included variants were manually curated to incorporate a range of effects across the spectrum of NPR2 activity, including those with no or minimal effects on activity, to act as negative controls. NPR2 variants were amplified as a pool and cloned via PspXI/NotI into the barcoded NPR2 vector. Twenty-five unique barcodes were selected for each of the 154 variants, yielding a final library of approximately 4,000 elements ( Figure S1 ). Sequencing (GENEWIZ; Azenta Life Sciences) was performed using a no-amplification (HpaI/BstEII digestion) method with the PacBio Sequencing v.3 kit and the Smart-Seq Sequel I (Illumina, CA, USA), resulting in 172,000 aligned reads. Analyses to associate variants with barcodes involved long-read alignment. The reference sequence used for alignment comprised a single FASTA entry containing NPR2 followed by a 54-bp spacer sequence (5'-AGCGGCCGCGTTGGTCAGGCTTGGATTTCTATAACTTCGTATAGCAGTTTAAAC-3'), a 20-bp barcode sequence, and finally a 20-bp 3′ barcode flanking sequence (5'-GTTTAAACCGAGAGATGGGG-3'). To account for the semi-degenerate structure of the barcode, Ns were used to fill this portion of the reference sequence. Alignment was performed with a PacBio-specific implementation of minimap2 ( https://github.com/lh3/minimap2 ), 54 namely pbmm2 align ( https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/pbmm2 ), where all default parameters were used. All reads that did not map to the reference sequence were excluded from further analyses. Assembly of read structure and barcode extraction were carried out using the Python application programming interface to Samtools ( https://www.htslib.org/ ), namely pysam ( https://pysam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html ), which was used to iterate over aligned reads and extract the reference positions aligned to bases of the read (excluding soft clipped bases [bases at the 5′ or 3′ end of a read that do not align to the reference]) and the CIGAR string (a sequence defining the structure of a read, detailing the position of insertions, deletions, soft clippings, and mismatches). Reads that did not cover the start of NPR2 as well as the barcode sequence were excluded from further analyses. The barcode sequence was extracted by a simple regular expression library in Python, namely re ( https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html ). A 5′ barcode flanking sequence, comprising the last 20 bp of the spacer sequence described earlier, was used to identify the position of the barcode, where regex allowed for a 1-bp error (insertion, deletion, or substitution) in searching for this spacer sequence. The following 20 bp after the flanking sequence were then assumed to be the barcode. After barcode extraction, the aligned read was recreated with the use of the CIGAR string to account for insertions and deletions. Where deletions were identified in the read, a dash (–) was inserted, and bases that were inserted were removed. After each read was reconstructed, the known variant positions could be extracted by indexing. Barcode polishing was used to correct for potential sequencing errors in the barcode. In this process, barcodes with identical sequences were grouped into clusters. If a specific barcode sequence was observed more than five times, it was assumed to be a “genuine” barcode. If it was observed five times or fewer, it was considered to have resulted from a sequencing error. Barcodes with potential sequencing errors were compared with all the barcodes in the “genuine” list by Levenshtein distance, with the use of the Python library pylev ( https://github.com/toastdriven/pylev ). The Levenshtein distance between two barcodes is the minimum number of single-character edits (insertions, deletions, or substitutions) required to change one barcode into the other. If a barcode was a Levenshtein distance of 2 or less to a “genuine” barcode, it was clustered with that “genuine” barcode. For each polished barcode cluster, the percentage of base calls was calculated for each variant position. Here, only the most prevalent call was reported with the respective observed frequency for that base. Library packaging, infection, and screening HEK293T cells were seeded at 65,000 cells/cm 2 in T225 flasks in 40 mL of medium (Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium [DMEM] plus 10% fetal bovine serum [FBS]) and incubated for 16–24 h at 37°C with 5% CO 2 . Transfection was carried out using 10.5 μg of NPR2 library plasmid, 12 μg of LV-MAX Lentiviral Packaging Mix, and 22.5 μL of Lipofectamine 2000 added to 2 mL of serum-free Opti-MEM (all reagents from Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was vortexed and incubated for 10 min at room temperature before being added to the cultured HEK293T cells. Twenty-four hours later, 40 U of DNase I (New England Biolabs, MA, USA) was added to each flask in order to remove untransfected plasmid. At 72 h after transfection, supernatant was harvested and passed through 0.45-μm filters (Stericup vacuum filters; Merck Millipore, MA, USA); aliquots were stored at −80°C. HEK293-cGMP-GFP reporter cells were infected with library plasmid (MOI = 0.2) to yield an initial coverage of ∼500-fold. Library-infected cells were puromycin selected (∼2 μg/mL) for 4 days, with coverage maintained above 1,000-fold for the duration of the screen. The screen involved resuspending cells (∼150 million cells per replicate) and stimulating with 0, 1, or 50 nM CNP for 1 h with gentle shaking. Replicate cell sorts were performed on a FACSAria II Flow Cytometric Cell Sorter (BD Biosciences, NJ, USA), gating on single blue fluorescent protein-positive (BFP + ) cells (NPR2-expressing cells) and collecting ∼250-fold coverage (4 million cells) per replicate for both GFP-high (top 15%) and GFP-low (bottom 15%) samples ( Figure S2 ). 55 Details of cell sorter instrument settings are shown in Figure S2 . Each sort was verified by running a portion again to show that cells were the correct phenotypes. Cell pellets were frozen and later processed for genomic DNA extraction, PCR amplification, and barcode sequencing according to https://manuals.cellecta.com/ngs-prep-kit-for-sgrna-shrna-dna-barcode-libraries/ using the primer sequences described and the NextSeq 2000 (Illumina) to obtain counts. Model-based analysis of genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 knockout (MAGeCK) and Mann-Whitney U analyses were performed to compare four GFP-high replicates with four GFP-low sorted samples ( Figure S3 ). 56 Transfection of NPR2 variants and cGMP CatchPoint assay For the CatchPoint assays, we curated the NPR2 variants in a similar way to the library screen. We selected variants from the initial two UK Biobank releases of exome data, focusing on variants with absolute estimated effect size on height >1 SD and including further variants that covered the potential range of effects on height. We also added variants that we detected in genetic testing cohorts to enrich for variants with functional effects. As the list of variants were curated at different times, the selections for the library screen and the CatchPoint assay were not fully overlapping. Positive controls were selected based on previously published CatchPoint data, 21 and included c.G1685A (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Arg562Gln [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]) for GoF, c.G953A (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Arg318Gln [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]) for mild LoF, and c.G2749C (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Gly917Arg [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]) for LoF. NPR2 variants were cloned into a bidirectional construct with EF1a driving NPR2 and CMV driving red luciferase (RedLuc) expression, using the reference NPR2 transcript (ENST00000342694.7; https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Transcript/Summary?db=core;g=ENSG00000159899;r=9:35791003-35809732;t=ENST00000342694 ). HEK293T cells were transfected with NPR2 -variant constructs ( n = 226) in quadruplicates (500 ng per 300,000 cells) using a 96-well Nucleofector (Lonza Group, Basel, Switzerland) integrated onto a liquid handling robot (Microlab STAR, NV, USA) and the Amaxa Cell Line Nucleofector Kit (Lonza Group). Cells were cultured for 3 days in 200 μL of medium (DMEM + 10% FBS + 1× penicillin/streptomycin + 1× GlutaMAX). The CatchPoint cGMP Fluorescent Assay Kit (Molecular Devices, CA, USA) was used to measure cGMP levels in CNP-stimulated NPR2 variant-transfected cells. After removing growth media from transfected cells, 80 μL of 0.75 mM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (Enzo Life Sciences, Exeter, UK) was gently added to each well, and the plate was incubated for 15 min at 37°C. CNP at 60 nM (40 μL) was added to each well (20 nM final concentration), and the plate was incubated for 15 min at 37°C. Stimulation was stopped by adding 40 μL of lysis buffer from the cGMP kit to each well, and cells were then completely lysed by shaking the plate vigorously for 5 min. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was carried out as instructed in the cGMP CatchPoint kit using 40 μL of cell lysate. Plates were read on a fluorescent plate reader, with excitation of 530 nm, emission of 590 nm, and a 570 nm cutoff. cGMP concentrations (pmol) were calculated using a standard curve. Statistical analysis of the functional screen and CatchPoint assay data For screen data, the activity of an NPR2 variant was calculated as relative enrichment in the GFP-high pool compared with the GFP-low pool, with values quantified by capturing log 2 fold change estimates from MAGeCK analysis. The log 2 fold change estimates and the false discovery rate (FDR) of the WT construct for each CNP concentration were subtracted from variants’ log 2 fold change estimates in the corresponding condition. Since MAGeCK’s p values are not corrected for the relative activity with respect to WT, Mann-Whitney U test p values adjusted with the Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction were used to evaluate statistical significance. For the newly generated CatchPoint assay data, cGMP-tagged luciferase activity normalized to WT levels captured the relative activity of NPR2 variants. Log 2 transformation was applied to each measurement; therefore, positive values indicate increased activity and negative values indicate decreased activity. Most variants had 4–12 replicates, and control variants, which were p.Arg562Gln for GoF, p.Arg318Gln for mild LoF, and p.Gly917Arg for LoF, had 84 or 88 replicates each. Each variant’s mean log 2 activity was calculated and a t test performed with “number of replicates − 1” as the degree of freedom to derive statistical significance, with a Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction applied. For existing CatchPoint assay data presented in Estrada et al. 21 ( n = 39), we directly used statistical results as in Table S2 , converting relative activity measurement to log 2 scales. NPR2 protein domains Based on InterPro’s ( https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/ ) entry for NPR2 ( P20594 ), functional domains were annotated based on the 1,047 amino-acid-long sequence. • ligand-binding domain (Pfam ID: PF01094): residues 45–397; • kinase homology domain (Pfam ID: PF07714): residues 540–783; and • GC domain (Pfam ID: PF00211): residues 852–1,037. These regions were used to assess functional assay results in relation to position within NPR2. NPR2 activity score calculation from functional readouts Since the log 2 fold change values of the functional screen and those of the CatchPoint assay have different scales, it was necessary to harmonize these data. NPR2 activity scores were designed such that LoF variants would have scores of 0, WT alleles would have scores of 1, and GoF variants would have scores greater than 1. For each assay type, protein-truncating variants (PTVs), which included stop-gain, frameshift, splice donor, and splice acceptor variants, were manually labeled with a score of 0. Missense variants with a fold change p value > 0.05 with a score of 1 were also manually labeled. To assign NPR2 activity score for the remaining missense variants, a linear model was used, with manually labeled variants as the training set. For our screen data, a linear regression model using the log 2 fold change of low-CNP and high-CNP data was employed. We expected that LoF variants would be more readily detected in high-CNP conditions and GoF variants more readily detected in low-CNP conditions. Thus, a model trained on high-CNP data on variants that showed log 2 fold change >0 in both low- and high-CNP conditions and a model trained on low-CNP data on variants that showed log 2 fold change <0 in both conditions were applied. Any remaining variants were labeled with a score of 1 because data from the two CNP conditions were not concordant. Finally, scores that were negative were converted to 0. From the trained linear models, the formula was as follows: NPR 2 activity score screen = { 0.9847 + 0.7458 × l f c low CNP , if lfc high CNP > 0 and lfc low CNP > 0 1.0037 + 0.4827 × l f c high CNP , if lfc high CNP < 0 and lfc low CNP < 0 1 , otherwise . For the CatchPoint assay, a linear regression model using the log 2 activity relative to WT of the Estrada et al. data and the newly generated data was used. 21 Similarly to the model used for our functional screen, NPR2 activity scores that were less than 0 were converted to 0. From the trained linear models, the formulae were as follows: NPR 2 activity score new CatchPoint = 1.0029 + 0.1689 × log 2 activity new CatchPoint , NPR 2 activity score Estrada et al . = 1.0147 + 0.1657 × log 2 activity Estrada et al . . This process resulted in three versions of each NPR2 activity score derived from the different sources, as the scores from the library screen in high-CNP and low-CNP conditions were integrated into a single score. For variants that were tested in more than one assay, we took the mean of the NPR2 activity scores and used this value as the consensus NPR2 activity score. NPR2 variant annotation based on functional readouts and the ClinVar database Low-CNP screen, high-CNP screen, Estrada et al. CatchPoint assay, 21 and newly generated CatchPoint assay were considered as the four sources of NPR2 variant functional readouts. Variants were annotated based on FDR in each assay and consistent observations across the data sources, if available from multiple sources. The decision tree for annotating NPR2 variants based on the functional assay results is depicted in Figure S4 . First, variants that had FDR > 0.05 in all available data sources were annotated as “typical activity,” as they were not significantly different from WT NPR2. Variants with FDR < 0.05 in at least one source were confirmed as nominally significant ( p < 0.05) with consistent effect direction in the other available data sources. If the variant was only evaluated in one assay, consistency was assumed. If other available data did not show consistent trends, we annotated those variants as “non-replicating.” Variants that passed this process were considered functional and were annotated based on the effect direction and strength. If the effect (i.e., log 2 fold change of the screen or log 2 activity in the CatchPoint assay) was positive, the variant was annotated as “GoF.” If the effect was negative, and the derived NPR2 activity score was <0.4, the variant was annotated as “LoF.” Although PTVs were manually given NPR2 activity scores of 0, the same NPR2 activity score formula was applied to the PTVs and it was determined that 0.4 was an appropriate threshold that captured PTVs causing LoF ( Figure S5 ). Missense or in-frame indel variants with NPR2 activity score >0.4 were annotated as “partial LoF,” as they showed significantly reduced function compared with WT but more activity than PTVs. Five variants were manually annotated. p.Arg562Gln was annotated as GoF because it showed a significant increase in cGMP production compared with WT across 21 plates as a positive control variant. Moreover, the Human Gene Mutation Database ( https://www.hgmd.cf.ac.uk/ac/index.php ) annotates the variant as GoF. c.A1676G (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Glu559Gly [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]), c.C2362T (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Arg788Cys [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]), and c.C2410T (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Arg804Cys [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]) were also annotated as GoF based on our validation analyses using CatchPoint assay at various CNP concentrations ( Figure S6 A). c.T3140C (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Leu1047Pro [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]) was annotated as non-replicating because the magnitude of effect on NPR2 function was drastically different between the screen and CatchPoint assay ( Figure S7 A). ClinVar was accessed on August 2, 2024, for clinical annotations of NPR2 variants. Variants annotated as pathogenic, likely pathogenic, and pathogenic/likely pathogenic were labeled as “P/LP.” Variants annotated as benign, likely benign, or benign/likely benign were labeled as “B/LB.” Variants that were either annotated as uncertain significance or were missing in ClinVar were labeled as “VUS” (variant of uncertain significance). Predicted NPR2 structure from AlphaFold 2 The AlphaFold protein structure database ( https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/ ) was accessed on October 24, 2024, to provide the predicted structure of NPR2 (ID: AF- P20594 -F1-v4). Residues from 537 to 790 were selected to represent the kinase homology domain to examine the functional consequences of NPR2 variants. Variant effect predictions of NPR2 missense variants Variant effect predictions were obtained from dbNSFP version 4.7c for BayesDel (no allele frequency version), MutPred, ESM1b, VARITY_R_LOO, gMVP, and REVEL. 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 Further predictions were obtained from AlphaMissense and PrimateAI, 63 , 64 following the instructions in the ENSEMBL Variant Effector Predictor tool. Missense variants were annotated with functional domains following the aforementioned amino acid residue ranges. When comparing variant effect predictions with NPR2 activity scores, we only considered missense variants annotated as LoF, partial LoF, GoF, and typical activity. Non-replicating variants were excluded because of lower confidence in the NPR2 activity scores. Genetic associations of NPR2 variants with height Standing height (UK Biobank data-field 50) was transformed to Z scores by first stratifying by sex (UK Biobank data-field 31). Within each sex, standing height was regressed on age at recruitment (UK Biobank data-field 21022) to account for cohort effects and potential reductions due to aging. The residuals from this regression were then transformed by subtracting the mean height for each sex and dividing by the SD. A single-variant genetic association test for NPR2 was performed with the whole-exome sequencing data (UK Biobank data-field 23159), using regenie on the UK Biobank Research Analysis Platform (UKB-RAP). 65 Sex, age, sex × age, age 2 , sex × age 2 , 20 genetic principal components (PCs) constructed from the UK Biobank cohort (UK Biobank data-field 22009), and assessment center (UK Biobank data-field 54) were used as covariates. We reasoned that rare variants in NPR2 would show comparable effects on stature regardless of ancestry. Thus, all samples with exome-sequencing data, height, and the other covariates present were analyzed together. Separately, variance explained by NPR2 activity scores was estimated based on the R 2 value from linear regression with the lm function in R by comparing two models; the first with and the second without NPR2 activity score. The leave-chr9-out polygenic score derived from regenie earlier, sex, age, sex × age, age 2 , sex × age 2 , 20 genetic PCs, and assessment center were used as covariates. The difference in the R 2 value is the proportion of variance explained by the NPR2 activity score. Height polygenic score To evaluate how polygenic background affected the impact of NPR2 function on height, height polygenic scores provided by UK Biobank data-field 26240 were incorporated. The creators of UK Biobank database adjusted polygenic scores for genetic PCs to derive a similar score distribution across ancestry. 66 Therefore, this score was used for all UK Biobank individuals, regardless of ancestry. Phenome-wide association study with NPR2 activity score and height A phenome-wide association study (PheWAS) was performed with International Classification of Diseases (10 th revision, ICD10) codes and quantitative traits in the UK Biobank using the NPR2 activity scores derived earlier. Each individual in our study was annotated with the NPR2 activity score of the functional NPR2 variants they carried. One individual who carried two missense variants with significant functional effects, namely c.G119T (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Trp40Leu [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]) (NPR2 activity: 0) and c.T124C (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Trp42Arg [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]) (NPR2 activity: 0.110), was labeled with the lower NPR2 activity score of 0. ICD10 codes from hospital episode statistics and primary care data were extracted and processed. ICD10 codes were combined based on the first two significant digit codes (e.g., A100 and A101 are processed to be A10) to increase the number of occurrences for each code. Only ICD10 codes that were present in at least 100 individuals were considered, and a total of 1,328 binary traits were tested. Various quantitative traits ranging from physical measurements to blood biochemistry panels were also incorporated into the PheWAS analysis. The quantile-normalized phenotype table using quantitative traits from the UK Biobank was generated using PHESANT. 67 Many quantitative traits were available in only a subset of the UK Biobank cohort, so if all individuals with a particular trait value had an NPR2 activity score of 1 (i.e., no variation in NPR2 activity score), such traits were discarded. A total of 1,316 quantitative traits were tested. For binary traits (i.e., ICD10 codes), logistic regression was used, and for quantitative traits, linear regression was used. Age, sex, sex × age, and 20 genotype PCs were used as covariates. Since functional NPR2 variants and many ICD10 codes are both rare, miscalibrated type I errors can occur during such tests. Therefore, for binary trait associations with p < 0.05, Firth logistic regression was performed with the logistf R package. A Bonferroni threshold of p = 0.05/2,633 was used for statistical significance, accounting for the number of tests. Next, traits associated with NPR2 activity, all of which were quantitative traits, were tested for associations with height. Across the quantitative traits, linear regression was performed using standing height (UK Biobank data-field 50) as the independent variable. Age, sex, age × sex, and ten genotype PCs were used as covariates. The Z statistic (= β /standard error [ β ]) of the NPR2 activity and height associations were derived for each trait to allow comparisons of both the significance and the direction of effect. Furthermore, the effect of including height in the model examining PheWAS associations with NPR2 activity was examined, using the same covariates as previously described. Results Given the multiple lines of evidence that NPR2 LoF variants can result in reduced human stature, we hypothesized that certain missense variants also contribute to growth deficits. To test our hypothesis, we generated a library of 154 NPR2 variants, including 148 missense variants and six PTVs, from the UK Biobank and screened them using a cGMP-GFP-based reporter assay for the ability to generate cGMP in response to CNP stimulation ( Table S1 ), with a reporter similar to that described by Valkovic et al. 68 cGMP-GFP reporter cells were infected with lentivirus expressing the library of missense variants ( Figure 1 A). Figure 1 Functional assay to measure the effect of NPR2 variants (A) A lentiviral-based library of 154 NPR variants (with ∼20 barcodes per variant on average) was cloned and packaged into lentiviral particles. Reporter cells were infected and puromycin selected for 3–4 days to select for NPR2-expressing cells. Cells were then expanded and stimulated with 0, 1, or 50 nM CNP prior to sorting on the BD Biosciences FACSAria II, collecting ∼250-fold coverage in the top/bottom 15% of GFP-expressing cells. Cell pellets were processed for gDNA extraction and PCR amplification of barcodes. Barcodes were sequenced to obtain counts. (B) Consistency between our screen and commercially available CatchPoint cGMP assay measurements of NPR2 activity. (C) Functional assay results showing NPR2 missense variants by position in NPR2 . Screen data under high-CNP condition (log 2 fold change in GFP-high pool, normalized for WT) and CatchPoint assay data (log 2 activity relative to WT) are shown. cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; CNP, C-type natriuretic peptide; FDR, false discovery rate; gDNA, genomic DNA; GFP, green fluorescent protein; NPR2, natriuretic peptide receptor 2; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; WT, wild type. Our screen was conducted under three regimens: high CNP (50 nM), low CNP (1 nM), and without CNP ( Table S3 ). These stimulation conditions were selected to optimize detection of reduced ligand-dependent signaling, increased ligand-dependent signaling, and unaltered ligand-independent signaling, respectively. Variants with GC activity phenotypes that significantly differed from WT were determined using MAGeCK and the Mann-Whitney U test, comparing the phenotypes of each variant with that of WT ( Tables S2 and S4 ). 56 Based on the Mann-Whitney U statistics, three significant activity-increasing and 33 significant activity-reducing variants were identified in the high-CNP screen (FDR < 0.05). For the low-CNP screen, ten significant activity-increasing and 40 significant activity-reducing variants (FDR < 0.05) were identified. The results from both screens with ligand present produced results generally concordant with a Pearson correlation, R 2 , of 0.85 ( Figure S6 E). For the Mann-Whitney U analysis, p values were calculated using activity from barcodes associated with each variant compared with barcodes from WT controls. To validate the results of our flow-cytometry-based screen, each variant was serially assayed using a commercially available cGMP CatchPoint assay. Data from Estrada et al., 21 which also utilized the CatchPoint assay to test NPR2 variants, were also incorporated. For activity-reducing variants, we stimulated with 20 nM CNP for 15 min and assayed cGMP production by sandwich ELISA using the cGMP fluorescent assay kit (Molecular Devices). For activity-increasing variants, we stimulated with 3-fold dilutions of 50 nM CNP (50, 16.7, 5.56, 1.85, 0.62, 0.21, 0.069, and 0) in order to capture dose-dependent stimulation differences between variant and WT NPR2 ( Figure S6 and Table S5 ). Further variants were tested with CatchPoint assays ( Figure S8 and Table S5 ), with 226 additional variants screened with 20 nM CNP. Data from our screen in low- and high-CNP conditions correlated with data from the commercially available assay ( R 2 = 0.563; Figures 1 B, S6 A, and S6B). In contrast, the no-CNP screen data showed no correlation with the CatchPoint assay readouts, as expected: when no CNP was present, NPR2 was not expected to produce cGMP. Furthermore, the newly generated CatchPoint assay data were consistent with the CatchPoint assay data from Estrada et al. ( n = 39) ( Figures S7 C and S7D). 21 When comparing the library screen and CatchPoint assay, there were three notably discordant variants: a frameshift variant at the C-terminal end (c.3136del [GenBank: NM_003995.4 ]; p.Leu1046SerfsTer? [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]) and two missense variants (p.Leu1047Pro and p.Arg804Cys). NPR2 is a 1,047-amino-acid protein, so the consequence of a frameshift variant at the C-terminal end (p.Leu1046SerfsTer?) depends on the downstream sequence context. As the DNA constructs for protein expression were different between the two assays, the variant was expected to produce two different proteins across the two experiments. p.Leu1047Pro was represented in the screen by only two unique barcodes and so its measured effect may be noisy ( Table S3 ). Both p.Leu1046SerfsTer? and p.Leu1047Pro were later annotated as “non-replicating.” Lastly, in an earlier validation experiment, p.Arg804Cys showed constitutive activity at various CNP concentrations ( Figures S6 A and S6C) and showed a significant positive effect, even in the screen with no CNP, suggesting it has some activity in the absence of CNP (adjusted p = 0.000259, MAGeCK, Table S2 ). Hence, p.Arg804Cys was later annotated as activity increasing. Further confirmation of library screening data is shown in Table S6 . Variants that showed activity significantly different from WT (FDR < 0.05) were distributed across NPR2 ( Figures 1 C and S9 ). Most functional variants reduced NPR2 activity. Among those tested, variants that increased NPR2 activity were predominantly located in the kinase homology domain. All three functional domains—ligand-binding, kinase homology, and GC—contained variants that reduced NPR2 function. NPR2 variants were next classified according to the nature of their impact on receptor activity based on our functional measurements. Since multiple sources were available for NPR2 variants’ functional readouts, measured effects were harmonized into a common scale called NPR2 activity score. This score was constructed such that complete LoF variants, such as PTVs, had a score of 0, and WT NPR2 had a score of 1. Based on the score construction, missense variants with p > 0.05 in the respective assays were manually labeled with a score of 1. A linear model, as described in material and methods ( NPR2 activity score calculation from functional readouts ), was used to assign a score for NPR2 activity for the remaining missense variants, based on the mean of the available scores across assays ( Table S7 ). Subsequently, missense variants were annotated as LoF, partial LoF, GoF, typical activity, or non-replicating (owing to non-replicating results in one of the assays), based on the statistical significance of the effect (i.e., FDR < 0.05), consistency between assays, and the magnitude of the effects ( Figure S4 ). The distinction between LoF and partial LoF was based on whether the effect was similar to that of PTVs. An NPR2 activity score of 0.4 was used as the threshold, based on the range of measured effects of PTVs ( Figure S5 ). Of the 245 missense variants tested in this study, ClinVar classifications indicated that five were pathogenic/likely pathogenic, nine were conflicting, 106 were VUS, two were benign/likely benign, and 123 were not annotated. Following our functional activity classifications, 47 variants were LoF, 34 were partial LoF, 14 were GoF, 87 showed typical activity, and 63 were non-replicating ( Figures 2 A and S10 ). The non-replicating variants showed significant effects in at least one assay, so additional work is necessary to annotate them accurately. Figure 2 Functional consequences of NPR2 variants (A) Functional annotation of 245 NPR2 missense variants based on experimental assays. Only variants that showed activity that was significantly different from WT activity were labeled as LoF, partial LoF, or GoF. “VUS” covers variants that were unannotated in ClinVar. Variant functional annotations followed the criteria shown in Figure S4 . (B) Predicted three-dimensional distribution of functional NPR2 variants in the kinase homology domain. GoF variants annotated in this study are labeled. (C) Comparison of AlphaMissense prediction and NPR2 missense variant effects on activity. Variants with NPR2 activity score of 1 are variants with p > 0.05 in all available data. Functional variants are defined as LoF, partial LoF, and GoF. Missense variants that did not show FDR < 0.05 in any assay are labeled as “not significant.” ρ is Spearman’s correlation coefficient. B/LB, benign/likely benign; GoF, gain of function; LoF, loss of function; NPR2, natriuretic peptide receptor 2; P/LP, pathogenic/likely pathogenic; VUS, variant of uncertain significance; WT, wild type. Furthermore, we evaluated the gain of information compared with the clinical classifications in ClinVar. In particular, functional readouts were generated for 106 VUSs in NPR2 , classifying these VUSs as 4 GoF, 16 LoF, 17 partial LoF, and 40 typical activity variants, with 29 that did not replicate. We also grouped 123 unannotated variants (i.e., missing in ClinVar) to 10 GoF, 26 LoF, 13 partial LoF, and 43 typical activity, with 31 that did not replicate. This demonstrates the value of generating functional data on protein variants. Among the 245 tested missense variants, GoF variants were enriched within the kinase homology domain (7 out of 14, p = 0.025, one-sided Fisher’s exact test). Seven GoF variants in the kinase homology domain—p.Glu559Gly, p.Arg562Gln, c.C1858T (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Arg620Cys [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]), c.A1886G (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Lys629Arg [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]), c.C2153T (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Ala718Val [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]), c. C2158T (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Arg720Cys [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]), and c.G2234C (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Arg745Pro [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ])—and two GoF variants that are five residues away from the domain boundary, namely c.G2363A (GenBank: NM_003995.4 ) (p.Arg788His [GenBank: NP_003986.2 ]) and p.Arg788Cys, are depicted in a predicted structure of the kinase homology domain from AlphaFold 2 ( Figures 2 B and S11 ). None of these residues altered the seven phosphorylation sites that when mutated cause constitutive NPR2 activity. 69 Interestingly, seven of these nine variants affected either an arginine or a lysine residue, which are positively charged at neutral pH. An alternative approach to evaluate variant pathogenicity is to rely on computational predictions, such as AlphaMissense, VARITY, and BayesDel. Therefore, functional readouts were compared with various pathogenicity predictions ( Figures 2 C and S12 ). AlphaMissense scores are shown as a representative example because this prediction tool was the top-performing tool across the highest number of variants scored. The predictive value of AlphaMissense, as well as the other tools, varied according to the domain in which particular variants were located. Predictions for the ligand-binding domain variants were strongly correlated with the variant effects on NPR2 activity (Spearman’s ρ 2 = 0.58), whereas those for the kinase homology domain variants were not (Spearman’s ρ 2 = 0.15). The comparison of kinase homology domain variants also highlights the inability of existing variant effect prediction tools, including AlphaMissense, in distinguishing LoF and GoF variants. Such tools typically output a score ranging from benign to pathogenic instead of a score predicting variant effect on protein function in both directions (i.e., decreased and increased activity). Therefore, functional experiments are necessary to accurately annotate both activity-reducing and activity-increasing variants on protein function. The measured cGMP response of each variant was compared to the estimated effect of that variant on final adult height based on data from the UK Biobank. Single-variant linear regression was performed, using regenie, on all NPR2 variants in the UK Biobank data ( Table S8 ). The dependent variable was the Z score of standing height (SDs from the mean) adjusted for age, sex, and height polygenic score. NPR2 activity score derived from the measured effect of each variant on cGMP signaling was then regressed on the estimated height effects ( Figure 3 A). This yielded a highly significant fit (Pearson’s R 2 = 0.438, p = 5.8 × 10 −10 ) and a clear relationship between reduced cGMP signaling and shorter stature. A notable observation is that not only does NPR2 activity show an approximately linear relationship with stature but also, the association with stature is bidirectional; the relationship of NPR2 activity with height has a spectrum of activity scores associated with a range of heights. Consistent with annotations for NPR2 variants, LoF variants’ effect on height ( β = −0.92 height SD) showed a similar range to PTVs’ effect on height ( β = −1.03 height SD), whereas partial LoFs ( β = −0.30 height SD) showed a more modest reduction in height ( Figures 3 A and S13 ). Across UK Biobank participants, the variance of height explained by the derived NPR2 activity score was estimated to be 0.05%. As this estimate is based on PTVs and tested missense variants, while assuming the other missense variants show WT activity (i.e., 1), having functional measurements on the untested missense variants would increase the amount of variance explained. This extends our understanding of the impact of NPR2 activity beyond that developed from studies of individuals with extreme short or tall stature. Figure 3 NPR2 activity is positively correlated with height (A) Positive correlation of NPR2 activity and variant effects on height. Larger circles equate to more individuals with that particular NPR2 variant. Pearson’s correlation R 2 and the associated p value are provided. Error bars indicate SE of the mean. (B) Within each functional activity category, polygenic scores combine additively with the effect of the NPR2 variant. (C) Frequencies of variant types. NPR2 PTVs and LoF missense variants show increasing enrichment in the shortest individuals, whereas GoF variants are enriched in the tallest. GoF, gain of function; Inf, infinity; LoF, loss of function; NPR2, natriuretic peptide receptor 2; PTV, protein-truncating variant; SE, standard error; WT, wild type. Next, the potential for additional functional NPR2 variants that were as yet untested, either because of the UK Biobank’s subsequent release of exome sequences or owing to experimental variation, was assessed. Considering missense variants that showed p < 0.01 in the UK Biobank single-variant association analysis revealed a further 18 variants that had not yet been examined ( Figure S14 ). Many of these could be variants that either reduce or increase NPR2 activity. As mentioned earlier, these variants will contribute further to the height variance explained by NPR2 variants. Notably, ten variants were annotated as non-replicating, owing to inconsistency across the assays. Eight of the non-replicating variants had absolute estimated height effects less than 1 SD in either direction, which is smaller than the effects of variants annotated as LoF in our study. Performing more replicate experiments may improve the power to detect these non-replicating variants as functional variants. As height is a highly polygenic trait, we evaluated the effect of polygenic background on NPR2 variants’ association with height. Height polygenic scores trained on data excluding UK Biobank samples were considered as the polygenic background on height within the UK Biobank. 66 Among the UK Biobank population, the mean effect for each SD of the height polygenic score on height Z scores was 0.905. The impact of NPR2 activity was observed to be additive and apparent across a range of genetic backgrounds, as assessed by comparing height polygenic scores and height Z scores ( Figure 3 B). Interaction analyses with each NPR2 variant annotation and height Z score were not significant ( p > 0.05). Functionally annotating NPR2 variants pinpointed a monogenic contribution to reduced stature. When we categorized UK Biobank individuals based on their height Z scores, those with height Z score under −2.5, who would be clinically considered as having short stature, were enriched for carrying NPR2 variants that reduce function (LoF, partial LoF, and PTV) compared with other categories ( Figure 3 C). Of the 2,837 individuals with clinical short stature, 22 individuals (0.78%) had a heterozygous NPR2 variant that likely contributes to reduced height, and 16 of these individuals carried an NPR2 missense variant that was previously unannotated in ClinVar. For those individuals who would have otherwise been diagnosed with idiopathic short stature, our study points to a monogenic cause of reduced stature. In comparison, GoF variants were more often detected in individuals in the taller categories, although the number and the strength of enrichment were limited owing to the small number of GoF variants annotated. As the missense variants annotated as LoF (i.e., NPR2 activity score <0.4) show effects similar to those of PTVs on NPR2 activity ( Figure S5 ) and on height (−0.92 vs. −1.03 height SD for LoF missense and PTV, respectively) ( Figure 3 A), these variants are likely to be pathogenic for AMD1 if they are homozygous or compound heterozygous with another LoF variant. To aid future classification of pathogenic variants, we provide Table S9 with our functional activity classes, REVEL scores, current ClinVar annotations, and mean height Z scores for the 47 LoF and 34 partial LoF variants classified using our functional assay ( Figure 2 A). These details span the categories of evidence recommended by the variant classification guidelines from the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. 70 The prevalence of AMD1 is approximately 1 in 1 million, 24 suggesting that the expected frequency of individuals heterozygous for NPR2 LoF variants is approximately 0.001 (i.e., 1 / 1 , 000 , 000 ). In UK Biobank data, 214 of 458,036 (0.0005) individuals had either an LoF missense variant or a PTV. This suggests that additional LoF missense variants likely remain to be annotated in the UK Biobank, and some of the NPR2 variants not tested in this study, but which have shown a trend for reduced stature, are likely candidates ( Figure S14 ). Furthermore, we also evaluated whether genetically determined NPR2 activity was associated with any traits other than height. Observing that genetically predicted NPR2 activity is uniquely associated with height and height-related traits would increase the likelihood that activating NPR2 would only have height-specific effects. Using a PheWAS analysis across binary clinical phenotypes and quantitative traits, significant associations (i.e., p < 0.05/2,633) were detected with traits such as standing height, fat-free mass, and forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV 1 ), each of which is known to be correlated with height ( Figure 4 A; Tables S10 and S11 ). Standing height was the trait most strongly associated with NPR2 activity score. No clinical phenotypes were significantly associated with genetically predicted NPR2 activity. To confirm that NPR2 activity affects only traits related to height, we also performed a PheWAS with height as the independent variable ( Table S12 ). All quantitative traits significantly associated with NPR2 activity were also strongly associated with height, suggesting that activating NPR2 is likely to affect height without resulting in unintended pleiotropic effects ( Figure 4 B). When conditioning on standing height, NPR2 activity score was no longer significantly associated with those traits, suggesting that height is the likely mediator ( Figure S15 ). Figure 4 Height-specific effects of variants altering NPR2 function (A) QQ plot of PheWAS of genetically predicted NPR2 activity. Binary and quantitative traits in the UK Biobank were considered for this analysis. Traits may have multiple data points if analyses were repeated. Phenotypes that passed the Bonferroni threshold ( p < 0.05/2,633) are labeled. (B) Comparison of NPR2 activity PheWAS associations and height PheWAS associations using quantitative traits. Z statistics for the association tests are plotted. Only traits that passed the Bonferroni threshold ( p < 0.05/2,633) are colored black and labeled. FEV 1 , forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FM, fat mass; FVC, forced vital capacity; L, left; LM, lean mass; NPR2, natriuretic peptide receptor 2; PheWAS, phenome-wide association study; QQ, quantile-quantile; R, right; WM, water mass. Discussion The aim of our work was to improve understanding of how NPR2 variation contributes to mechanisms underlying determination of height. We have achieved our aim through several strategies. First, we generated functional data for 245 NPR2 missense variants using multiple data sources, providing additional information on how NPR2 variants affect receptor activity. Our high-throughput screening assay allowed the analysis of hundreds of variants simultaneously and detection of both loss and gain of NPR2 activity to comprehensively explore the bidirectional nature of NPR2 variants. Identifying additional LoF missense variants in NPR2 not only leads to more specific diagnoses for some individuals with idiopathic short stature but also contributes to diagnosis of AMD1, which is caused by bi-allelic LoF of NPR2 . 24 , 38 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 Although the effects of NPR2 variants alone and as compound heterozygotes have been shown in families with AMD1 and other short-stature phenotypes, 38 we extend knowledge of variant effects further by examining both LoF and GoF in the same study. Comparison of our assay with a commercially available CatchPoint assay and published data confirmed our procedures 21 and provided additional sources to categorize NPR2 activity. The CatchPoint system uses 96-well plates, introducing the potential for well-to-well, plate-to-plate, and day-to-day variability. In contrast, reporter-based screens assess variants in parallel in a single experiment, reducing variability. In addition, our reporter-based assay examined ∼20 barcodes per variant, which served as replicates. Indeed, our results were highly reproducible across experiments. Using our functional activity categories, we were able to reclassify a number of variants that were listed as VUS or unannotated in ClinVar. Extending understanding of the functional effects of NPR2 variants and considering their associations with clinical short stature in UK Biobank individuals is a key component in the interpretation of sequence variants. 70 To more fully decipher how variants may contribute to regulation of NPR2 activity, we examined the location of variants according to functional domains (extracellular ligand-binding domain, single transmembrane domain, kinase homology domain, and intracellular domain with GC catalytic activity). We observed that GoF variants were enriched in the kinase homology domain; however, as not all possible missense variants in NPR2 were assessed, a deep mutational scan would be necessary to confirm whether this observation can be generalized. ClinVar lists further VUSs that have not yet been analyzed using our assay, and extending our studies to examine these variants provides an additional opportunity to elucidate the contributions of variants to NPR2 activity. Our second strategy used genotype and phenotype data from the UK Biobank to examine the consequences of naturally occurring NPR2 variation in a very large sample of the general population. We report that NPR2 activity regulates height, regardless of polygenic background, with the effects of NPR2 variants being approximately additive across a spectrum of genetic backgrounds and modulating height (both positively and negatively) more than would be expected. Finally, we identified 22 individuals carrying variants that reduced the activity of NPR2, equating to 0.78% of those in the UK Biobank with clinical short stature (assessed as having a height Z score under −2.5). These individuals had a range of NPR2 variants, including PTVs, LoF variants, and partial LoF variants. A previous study examining the contribution of NPR2 to idiopathic short stature reported that between ∼0% and 3.8% of affected individuals carried NPR2 variants, 34 highlighting the need to elucidate other contributing factors. Furthermore, the NPR2 activity scores from PTVs and tested missense NPR2 variants explained 0.05% of the height variance in the UK Biobank. In this manner, our functional data enabled us to utilize a quantitative functional score for NPR2 to estimate variance in height in humans. Together, our strategies illustrate wide-ranging functional effects of NPR2 with impacts on height and associated traits in the general population and individuals with clinical short stature, regardless of polygenic background. Observing that genetically predicted NPR2 activity was uniquely associated with height and height-related traits increases the likelihood that activating NPR2 would not have pleiotropic effects, which is an important consideration when evaluating the benefit/risk ratio of therapeutically targeting NPR2 for short stature. Further, we note the bidirectional association of NPR2 activity and short stature with a near-linear dose-response curve. While data from variants and genotypes that result in large effects on stature provide information on the extremes of the height spectrum, our study incorporates variants across the spectrum, extending our understanding of variants with more moderate impacts on height. The activity of NPR2 may be likened to a dimmer switch, with extremes of height aligning with “off” and “fully on” activity, but with many different levels of activity between these points. As such, the associated modulation of CNP activity could provide a more adjustable approach compared with treatment targets that have an “on/off” effect. In the field of skeletal conditions and considering the spectrum of human height, this nuanced approach could offer an adaptable strategy across a range of height disorders. 6 , 27 Indeed, trials of the CNP analog vosoritide (BMN 111), initially examined in individuals with achondroplasia, have already been undertaken in participants with a range of genetic short-stature disorders, including heterozygous NPR2 variant carriers ( ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT04219007 ). 32 , 33 These ongoing trials emphasize the imperative to understand the extent of NPR2 variants’ contribution across the height spectrum in order to identify other individuals with short-stature disorders who could benefit from treatment with CNP analogs. With multiple other genes involved in the regulation of chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation, 6 , 7 , 16 , 18 , 27 our study highlights the potential of combining genomic, phenotypic, and functional data as a powerful tool to dissect complex traits, such as height, and clinical short stature. Conclusions Using a combination of functional assays, published data, 21 and genetic and physical data from the UK Biobank, we were able to categorize NPR2 variants and demonstrate near-linear association between NPR2 activity and height. Such information extends existing knowledge of rare variants of NPR2 that cause short stature and extreme tall stature to elucidate the complex regulation of height in the general population. Data and code availability The article and its supplemental information include all datasets generated or analyzed during this study. Acknowledgments Emma Conran, Porterhouse Medical, Reading, UK, provided writing support, funded by BioMarin Pharmaceutical. This research has been conducted using the UK Biobank Resource under application number 41232. Herb Kasler and Ritesh Tiwari, the Buck Institute Flow Cytometry Core, provided cell-sorting services. Cellecta performed NGS processing of samples. Michael Berry, Bioinformatics CRO, developed the analysis for short- and long-read analysis for identifying and associating barcodes with variants. Tamil Murugasen, MResult, developed the ENSEMBL VEP pipeline. Author contributions C.B., conceptualization, formal analysis, investigation, supervision, writing – original draft, and writing – review and editing (significant scientific guidance and input, and identified NPR2 variants to include in both CatchPoint and library screening); D.Z. and N.M., data curation, investigation, writing – review and editing (performed sorting experiments and collection/quality control of sorted samples); D.S., data curation, investigation, writing – review and editing (optimized library screening and NGS processing of samples and performed all CatchPoint assay experiments); D.R., data curation, investigation, writing – review and editing (established optimized sorting parameters to maximize reporter signal, performed sorting experiments and collection/quality control of sorted samples, and generated supplemental figures); K.E., conceptualization, formal analysis, investigation, writing – review and editing (contributed to experimental design, data analysis, and interpretation of results); R.J., formal analysis, investigation, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing (performed data analysis and generated figures); and S.C. and S.F., conceptualization, methodology, investigation, supervision, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing (conceived the library screening strategy, including development of reporter line and barcoding strategy). All authors have approved the final version for submission. Declaration of interests All authors are current or past employees of BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. K.E. is a current employee of Maze Therapeutics. N.M. is a current employee of Site Therapeutics (SiteTx). Published: January 8, 2026 Footnotes Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2025.12.006 . Web resources 
 AlphaFold protein structure database, https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/ Cellecta processing protocol, https://manuals.cellecta.com/crispr-pooled-lentiviral-sgrna-libraries/v3a/en/topic/large-scale-genomic-dna-extraction-protocol GenBank, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/ InterPro, https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/ minimap2, https://github.com/lh3/minimap2 OMIM, https://www.omim.org/ pbmm2 align, https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/pbmm2 pylev, https://github.com/toastdriven/pylev pysam, https://pysam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html re, https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html regenie (on UKB-RAP, for single-variant genetic association tests), https://rgcgithub.github.io/regenie/ Samtools, https://www.htslib.org/ UK Biobank, https://www.ukbiobank.ac.uk/ 
 Supplemental information 
 Document S1. Figures S1–S15 
 Table S1. Variants in library 
 Table S2. CNP screen—MAGeCK analyses 
 Table S3. CNP screen results 
 Table S4. CNP screen—Mann-Whitney analyses 
 Table S5. CatchPoint assay data 
 Table S6. Stimulation curves and EC 50 effects 
 Table S7. NPR2 activity score 
 Table S8. NPR2 variant height associations 
 Table S9. LoF and partial LoF variants in NPR2 
 Table S10. NPR2 activity with binary trait PheWAS 
 Table S11. NPR2 activity and quantitative trait PheWAS 
 Table S12. Height and quantitative trait PheWAS 
 Document S2. Article plus supplemental information 
 References 1. Janghorbani M., Momeni F., Dehghani M. Hip circumference, height and risk of type 2 diabetes: systematic review and meta-analysis. Obes. Rev. 2012;13:1172–1181. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2012.01030.x. 2. Bradfield J.P., Kember R.L., Ulrich A., Balkhiyarova Z., Alyass A., Aris I.M., Bell J.A., Broadaway K.A., Chen Z., Chai J.F., et al. Trans-ancestral genome-wide association study of longitudinal pubertal height growth and shared heritability with adult health outcomes. Genome Biol. 2024;25:22. doi: 10.1186/s13059-023-03136-z. 3. Papadopoulou A., Åsvold B.O., Burgess S., Kuś A., Medici M., Sterenborg R., Teumer A., Deloukas P., Marouli E. Height, autoimmune thyroid disease, and thyroid cancer: a Mendelian randomization study. Thyroid. 2023;33:1476–1482. doi: 10.1089/thy.2023.0272. 4. Raghavan S., Huang J., Tcheandjieu C., Huffman J.E., Litkowski E., Liu C., Ho Y.-L.A., Hunter-Zinck H., Zhao H., Marouli E., et al. A multi-population phenome-wide association study of genetically-predicted height in the Million Veteran Program. PLoS Genet. 2022;18 doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1010193. 5. Muthuirulan P., Capellini T.D. Complex phenotypes: mechanisms underlying variation in human stature. Curr. Osteoporos. Rep. 2019;17:301–323. doi: 10.1007/s11914-019-00527-9. 6. Wood A.R., Esko T., Yang J., Vedantam S., Pers T.H., Gustafsson S., Chu A.Y., Estrada K., Luan J., Kutalik Z., et al. Defining the role of common variation in the genomic and biological architecture of adult human height. Nat. Genet. 2014;46:1173–1186. doi: 10.1038/ng.3097. 7. Yengo L., Vedantam S., Marouli E., Sidorenko J., Bartell E., Sakaue S., Graff M., Eliasen A.U., Jiang Y., Raghavan S., et al. A saturated map of common genetic variants associated with human height. Nature. 2022;610:704–712. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05275-y. 8. Jelenkovic A., Sund R., Hur Y.-M., Yokoyama Y., Hjelmborg J.V.B., Möller S., Honda C., Magnusson P.K.E., Pedersen N.L., Ooki S., et al. Genetic and environmental influences on height from infancy to early adulthood: an individual-based pooled analysis of 45 twin cohorts. Sci. Rep. 2016;6 doi: 10.1038/srep28496. 9. Jelenkovic A., Hur Y.-M., Sund R., Yokoyama Y., Siribaddana S.H., Hotopf M., Sumathipala A., Rijsdijk F., Tan Q., Zhang D., et al. Genetic and environmental influences on adult human height across birth cohorts from 1886 to 1994. eLife. 2016;5 doi: 10.7554/eLife.20320. 10. Jelenkovic A., Sund R., Yokoyama Y., Latvala A., Sugawara M., Tanaka M., Matsumoto S., Freitas D.L., Maia J.A., Knafo-Noam A., et al. Genetic and environmental influences on human height from infancy through adulthood at different levels of parental education. Sci. Rep. 2020;10:7974. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-64883-8. 11. Conery M., Grant S.F.A. Human height: a model common complex trait. Ann. Hum. Biol. 2023;50:258–266. doi: 10.1080/03014460.2023.2215546. 12. Perkins J.M., Subramanian S.V., Davey Smith G., Özaltin E. Adult height, nutrition, and population health. Nutr. Rev. 2016;74:149–165. doi: 10.1093/nutrit/nuv105. 13. Yengo L., Sidorenko J., Kemper K.E., Zheng Z., Wood A.R., Weedon M.N., Frayling T.M., Hirschhorn J., Yang J., Visscher P.M., GIANT Consortium Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies for height and body mass index in ∼700000 individuals of European ancestry. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2018;27:3641–3649. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy271. 14. Carty C.L., Johnson N.A., Hutter C.M., Reiner A.P., Peters U., Tang H., Kooperberg C. Genome-wide association study of body height in African Americans: the Women’s Health Initiative SNP Health Association Resource (SHARe) Hum. Mol. Genet. 2012;21:711–720. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr489. 15. Lin E., Tsai S.-J., Kuo P.-H., Liu Y.-L., Yang A.C., Conomos M.P., Thornton T.A. Genome-wide association study in the Taiwan Biobank identifies four novel genes for human height: NABP2, RASA2, RNF41 and SLC39A5. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2021;30:2362–2369. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddab202. 16. Graff M., Justice A.E., Young K.L., Marouli E., Zhang X., Fine R.S., Lim E., Buchanan V., Rand K., Feitosa M.F., et al. Discovery and fine-mapping of height loci via high-density imputation of GWASs in individuals of African ancestry. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2021;108:564–582. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.02.011. 17. Hao Y., Liu X., Lu X., Yang X., Wang L., Chen S., Li H., Li J., Cao J., Chen J., et al. Genome-wide association study in Han Chinese identifies three novel loci for human height. Hum. Genet. 2013;132:681–689. doi: 10.1007/s00439-013-1280-9. 18. Estrada K., Krawczak M., Schreiber S., van Duijn K., Stolk L., van Meurs J.B.J., Liu F., Penninx B.W.J.H., Smit J.H., Vogelzangs N., et al. A genome-wide association study of northwestern Europeans involves the C-type natriuretic peptide signaling pathway in the etiology of human height variation. Hum. Mol. Genet. 2009;18:3516–3524. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp296. 19. Hawkes G., Beaumont R.N., Li Z., Mandla R., Li X., Albert C.M., Arnett D.K., Ashley-Koch A.E., Ashrani A.A., Barnes K.C., et al. Whole-genome sequencing in 333,100 individuals reveals rare non-coding single variant and aggregate associations with height. Nat. Commun. 2024;15:8549. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-52579-w. 20. Jurgens S.J., Choi S.H., Morrill V.N., Chaffin M., Pirruccello J.P., Halford J.L., Weng L.-C., Nauffal V., Roselli C., Hall A.W., et al. Analysis of rare genetic variation underlying cardiometabolic diseases and traits among 200,000 individuals in the UK Biobank. Nat. Genet. 2022;54:240–250. doi: 10.1038/s41588-021-01011-w. 21. Estrada K., Froelich S., Wuster A., Bauer C.R., Sterling T., Clark W.T., Ru Y., Trinidad M., Nguyen H.P., Luu A.R., et al. Identifying therapeutic drug targets using bidirectional effect genes. Nat. Commun. 2021;12:2224. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-21843-8. 22. Olney R.C. C-type natriuretic peptide in growth: a new paradigm. Growth Horm. IGF Res. 2006;16:S6–S14. doi: 10.1016/j.ghir.2006.03.016. 23. Yasoda A., Ogawa Y., Suda M., Tamura N., Mori K., Sakuma Y., Chusho H., Shiota K., Tanaka K., Nakao K. Natriuretic peptide regulation of endochondral ossification: evidence for possible roles of the C-type natriuretic peptide/guanylyl cyclase-B pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 1998;273:11695–11700. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.19.11695. 24. Bartels C.F., Bükülmez H., Padayatti P., Rhee D.K., van Ravenswaaij-Arts C., Pauli R.M., Mundlos S., Chitayat D., Shih L.-Y., Al-Gazali L.I., et al. Mutations in the transmembrane natriuretic peptide receptor NPR-B impair skeletal growth and cause acromesomelic dysplasia, type Maroteaux. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2004;75:27–34. doi: 10.1086/422013. 25. Lorget F., Kaci N., Peng J., Benoist-Lasselin C., Mugniery E., Oppeneer T., Wendt D.J., Bell S.M., Bullens S., Bunting S., et al. Evaluation of the therapeutic potential of a CNP analog in a Fgfr3 mouse model recapitulating achondroplasia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2012;91:1108–1114. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.10.014. 26. Hachiya R., Ohashi Y., Kamei Y., Suganami T., Mochizuki H., Mitsui N., Saitoh M., Sakuragi M., Nishimura G., Ohashi H., et al. Intact kinase homology domain of natriuretic peptide receptor-B is essential for skeletal development. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2007;92:4009–4014. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-1101. 27. Vasques G.A., Arnhold I.J.P., Jorge A.A.L. Role of the natriuretic peptide system in normal growth and growth disorders. Horm. Res. Paediatr. 2014;82:222–229. doi: 10.1159/000365049. 28. Potter L.R. Regulation and therapeutic targeting of peptide-activated receptor guanylyl cyclases. Pharmacol. Ther. 2011;130:71–82. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.12.005. 29. Hannema S.E., van Duyvenvoorde H.A., Premsler T., Yang R.-B., Mueller T.D., Gassner B., Oberwinkler H., Roelfsema F., Santen G.W.E., Prickett T., et al. An activating mutation in the kinase homology domain of the natriuretic peptide receptor-2 causes extremely tall stature without skeletal deformities. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2013;98:E1988–E1998. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-2358. 30. Potter L.R., Abbey-Hosch S., Dickey D.M. Natriuretic peptides, their receptors, and cyclic guanosine monophosphate-dependent signaling functions. Endocr. Rev. 2006;27:47–72. doi: 10.1210/er.2005-0014. 31. Peake N.J., Hobbs A.J., Pingguan-Murphy B., Salter D.M., Berenbaum F., Chowdhury T.T. Role of C-type natriuretic peptide signalling in maintaining cartilage and bone function. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 2014;22:1800–1807. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2014.07.018. 32. Dauber A., Zhang A., Kanakatti Shankar R., Boucher K., McCarthy T., Shafaei N., Seaforth R., Castro M.G., Dham N., Merchant N. Vosoritide treatment for children with hypochondroplasia: a phase 2 trial. eClinicalMedicine. 2024;71 doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2024.102591. 33. Savarirayan R., Wilcox W.R., Harmatz P., Phillips J., 3rd, Polgreen L.E., Tofts L., Ozono K., Arundel P., Irving M., Bacino C.A., et al. Vosoritide therapy in children with achondroplasia aged 3–59 months: a multinational, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial. Lancet Child Adolesc. Health. 2024;8:40–50. doi: 10.1016/S2352-4642(23)00265-1. 34. Wang S.R., Jacobsen C.M., Carmichael H., Edmund A.B., Robinson J.W., Olney R.C., Miller T.C., Moon J.E., Mericq V., Potter L.R., et al. Heterozygous mutations in natriuretic peptide receptor-B (NPR2) gene as a cause of short stature. Hum. Mutat. 2015;36:474–481. doi: 10.1002/humu.22773. 35. Amano N., Mukai T., Ito Y., Narumi S., Tanaka T., Yokoya S., Ogata T., Hasegawa T. Identification and functional characterization of two novel NPR2 mutations in Japanese patients with short stature. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2014;99:E713–E718. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-3525. 36. Chen H., Zhang S., Sun Y., Chen J., Yuan K., Zhang Y., Yang X., Lin X., Chen R. Novel pathogenic NPR2 variants in short stature patients and the therapeutic response to rhGH. Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 2023;18:221. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02757-8. 37. Badawi S., Varghese D.S., Raj A., John A., Al-Musafir H.S., Al-Ghamari A.J., Alshamsi A.R., Ouda S.H., Al-Dirbashi G., Ali B.R. Unveiling the pathogenic mechanisms of NPR2 missense variants: insights into the genotype-associated severity in acromesomelic dysplasia and short stature. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2023;11 doi: 10.3389/fcell.2023.1294748. 38. Hanley P.C., Kanwar H.S., Martineau C., Levine M.A. Short stature is progressive in patients with heterozygous NPR2 mutations. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2020;105:3190–3202. doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgaa491. 39. Hwang I.T., Mizuno Y., Amano N., Lee H.J., Shim Y.S., Nam H.-K., Rhie Y.-J., Yang S., Lee K.-H., Hasegawa T., Kang M.J. Role of NPR2 mutation in idiopathic short stature: identification of two novel mutations. Mol. Genet. Genomic Med. 2020;8 doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1146. 40. Stavber L., Gaia M.J., Hovnik T., Jenko Bizjan B., Debeljak M., Kovač J., Omladič J.Š., Battelino T., Kotnik P., Dovč K. Heterozygous NPR2 variants in idiopathic short stature. Genes. 2022;13:1065. doi: 10.3390/genes13061065. 41. Hauer N.N., Popp B., Schoeller E., Schuhmann S., Heath K.E., Hisado-Oliva A., Klinger P., Kraus C., Trautmann U., Zenker M., et al. Clinical relevance of systematic phenotyping and exome sequencing in patients with short stature. Genet. Med. 2018;20:630–638. doi: 10.1038/gim.2017.159. 42. Ain N.U., Iqbal M., Valta H., Emerling C.A., Ahmed S., Makitie O., Naz S. Novel variants in natriuretic peptide receptor 2 in unrelated patients with acromesomelic dysplasia type Maroteaux. Eur. J. Med. Genet. 2019;62 doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2018.10.006. 43. Chen M., Miao H., Liang H., Ke X., Yang H., Gong F., Wang L., Duan L., Chen S., Pan H., Zhu H. Clinical characteristics of short-stature patients with collagen gene mutation and the therapeutic response to rhGH. Front. Endocrinol. 2022;13 doi: 10.3389/fendo.2022.820001. 44. Khan S., Ali R.H., Abbasi S., Nawaz M., Muhammad N., Ahmad W. Novel mutations in natriuretic peptide receptor-2 gene underlie acromesomelic dysplasia, type maroteaux. BMC Med. Genet. 2012;13:44. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-44. 45. Sag S.O., Gorukmez O., Topak A., Gorukmez O., Ture M., Sahinturk S., Gulten T., Yakut T. A novel mutation in NPR2 gene in a patient with acromesomelic dysplasia, Maroteaux type. Genet. Couns. 2015;26:219–225. 46. Wang W., Song M.H., Miura K., Fujiwara M., Nawa N., Ohata Y., Kitaoka T., Kubota T., Namba N., Jin D.K., et al. Acromesomelic dysplasia, type maroteaux caused by novel loss-of-function mutations of the NPR2 gene: three case reports. Am. J. Med. Genet. 2016;170A:426–434. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37463. 47. Wu J., Wang M., Jiao Z., Dou B., Li B., Zhang J., Zhang H., Sun Y., Tu X., Kong X., Bai Y. Novel loss-of-function mutations in NPR2 cause acromesomelic dysplasia, Maroteaux type. Front. Genet. 2022;13 doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.823861. 48. Hisado-Oliva A., Garre-Vázquez A.I., Santaolalla-Caballero F., Belinchón A., Barreda-Bonis A.C., Vasques G.A., Ramirez J., Luzuriaga C., Carlone G., González-Casado I., et al. Heterozygous NPR2 mutations cause disproportionate short stature, similar to Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2015;100:E1133–E1142. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-1612. 49. Lauffer P., Boudin E., van der Kaay D.C.M., Koene S., van Haeringen A., van Tellingen V., Van Hul W., Prickett T.C.R., Mortier G., Espiner E.A., van Duyvenvoorde H.A. Broadening the spectrum of loss-of-function variants in NPR-C-related extreme tall stature. J. Endocr. Soc. 2022;6 doi: 10.1210/jendso/bvac019. 50. Miura K., Kim O.-H., Lee H.R., Namba N., Michigami T., Yoo W.J., Choi I.H., Ozono K., Cho T.-J. Overgrowth syndrome associated with a gain-of-function mutation of the natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (NPR2) gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 2014;164A:156–163. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36218. 51. Sudlow C., Gallacher J., Allen N., Beral V., Burton P., Danesh J., Downey P., Elliott P., Green J., Landray M., et al. UK Biobank: an open access resource for identifying the causes of a wide range of complex diseases of middle and old age. PLoS Med. 2015;12 doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001779. 52. Matsuda S., Harada K., Ito M., Takizawa M., Wongso D., Tsuboi T., Kitaguchi T. Generation of a cGMP indicator with an expanded dynamic range by optimization of amino acid linkers between a fluorescent protein and PDE5α. ACS Sens. 2017;2:46–51. doi: 10.1021/acssensors.6b00582. 53. Robinson E.K., Covarrubias S., Zhou S., Carpenter S. Generation and utilization of a HEK-293T murine GM-CSF expressing cell line. PLoS One. 2021;16 doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0249117. 54. Li H. Minimap2: pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics. 2018;34:3094–3100. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bty191. 55. Lee J.A., Spidlen J., Boyce K., Cai J., Crosbie N., Dalphin M., Furlong J., Gasparetto M., Goldberg M., Goralczyk E.M., et al. MIFlowCyt: The minimum information about a flow cytometry experiment. Cytometry. A. 2008;73:926–930. doi: 10.1002/cyto.a.20623. 56. Li W., Xu H., Xiao T., Cong L., Love M.I., Zhang F., Irizarry R.A., Liu J.S., Brown M., Liu X.S. MAGeCK enables robust identification of essential genes from genome-scale CRISPR/Cas9 knockout screens. Genome Biol. 2014;15:554. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0554-4. 57. Pejaver V., Byrne A.B., Feng B.J., Pagel K.A., Mooney S.D., Karchin R., O’Donnell-Luria A., Harrison S.M., Tavtigian S.V., Greenblatt M.S., et al. Calibration of computational tools for missense variant pathogenicity classification and ClinGen recommendations for PP3/BP4 criteria. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2022;109:2163–2177. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.10.013. 58. Li B., Krishnan V.G., Mort M.E., Xin F., Kamati K.K., Cooper D.N., Mooney S.D., Radivojac P. Automated inference of molecular mechanisms of disease from amino acid substitutions. Bioinformatics. 2009;25:2744–2750. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp528. 59. Brandes N., Goldman G., Wang C.H., Ye C.J., Ntranos V. Genome-wide prediction of disease variant effects with a deep protein language model. Nat. Genet. 2023;55:1512–1522. doi: 10.1038/s41588-023-01465-0. 60. Wu Y., Li R., Sun S., Weile J., Roth F.P. Improved pathogenicity prediction for rare human missense variants. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2021;108:1891–1906. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.08.012. 61. Zhang H., Xu M.S., Fan X., Chung W.K., Shen Y. Predicting functional effect of missense variants using graph attention neural networks. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2022;4:1017–1028. doi: 10.1038/s42256-022-00561-w. 62. Ioannidis N.M., Rothstein J.H., Pejaver V., Middha S., McDonnell S.K., Baheti S., Musolf A., Li Q., Holzinger E., Karyadi D., et al. REVEL: An ensemble method for predicting the pathogenicity of rare missense variants. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 2016;99:877–885. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.08.016. 63. Cheng J., Novati G., Pan J., Bycroft C., Žemgulytė A., Applebaum T., Pritzel A., Wong L.H., Zielinski M., Sargeant T., et al. Accurate proteome-wide missense variant effect prediction with AlphaMissense. Science. 2023;381 doi: 10.1126/science.adg7492. 64. Sundaram L., Gao H., Padigepati S.R., McRae J.F., Li Y., Kosmicki J.A., Fritzilas N., Hakenberg J., Dutta A., Shon J., et al. Predicting the clinical impact of human mutation with deep neural networks. Nat. Genet. 2018;50:1161–1170. doi: 10.1038/s41588-018-0167-z. 65. Mbatchou J., Barnard L., Backman J., Marcketta A., Kosmicki J.A., Ziyatdinov A., Benner C., O’Dushlaine C., Barber M., Boutkov B., et al. Computationally efficient whole-genome regression for quantitative and binary traits. Nat. Genet. 2021;53:1097–1103. doi: 10.1038/s41588-021-00870-7. 66. Thompson D.J., Wells D., Selzam S., Peneva I., Moore R., Sharp K., Tarran W.A., Beard E.J., Riveros-Mckay F., Giner-Delgado C., et al. A systematic evaluation of the performance and properties of the UK Biobank Polygenic Risk Score (PRS) Release. PLoS One. 2024;19 doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0307270. 67. Millard L.A.C., Davies N.M., Gaunt T.R., Davey Smith G., Tilling K. Software Application Profile: PHESANT: a tool for performing automated phenome scans in UK Biobank. Int. J. Epidemiol. 2018;47:29–35. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyx204. 68. Valkovic A.L., Kocan M., Hoare B., Marshall S., Scott D.J., Bathgate R.A.D. A real-time, plate-based BRET assay for detection of cGMP in primary cells. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022;23:1908. doi: 10.3390/ijms23031908. 69. Robinson J.W., Blixt N.C., Norton A., Mansky K.C., Ye Z., Aparicio C., Wagner B.M., Benton A.M., Warren G.L., Khosla S., et al. Male mice with elevated C-type natriuretic peptide-dependent guanylyl cyclase-B activity have increased osteoblasts, bone mass and bone strength. Bone. 2020;135 doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2020.115320. 70. Richards S., Aziz N., Bale S., Bick D., Das S., Gastier-Foster J., Grody W.W., Hegde M., Lyon E., Spector E., et al. Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a joint consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology. Genet. Med. 2015;17:405–424. doi: 10.1038/gim.2015.30. Associated Data Supplementary Materials Document S1. Figures S1–S15 Table S1. Variants in library Table S2. CNP screen—MAGeCK analyses Table S3. CNP screen results Table S4. CNP screen—Mann-Whitney analyses Table S5. CatchPoint assay data Table S6. Stimulation curves and EC 50 effects Table S7. NPR2 activity score Table S8. NPR2 variant height associations Table S9. LoF and partial LoF variants in NPR2 Table S10. NPR2 activity with binary trait PheWAS Table S11. NPR2 activity and quantitative trait PheWAS Table S12. Height and quantitative trait PheWAS Document S2. Article plus supplemental information Data Availability Statement The article and its supplemental information include all datasets generated or analyzed during this study. 