
=== PAGE 1 ===
HIF-1α metabolically controls: collagen synthesis and 
modification in chondrocytes
Steve Stegena,#, Kjell Laperrea,#, Guy Eelenb, Gianmarco Rinaldic, Peter Fraislb, Sophie 
Torrekensa, Riet Van Looverena, Shauni Loopmansa, Geert Bultynckd, Stefan Vinckierb, 
Filip Meersmane, Patrick H. Maxwellf, Jyoti Raig, MaryAnn Weisg, David R. Eyreg, Bart 
Ghesquièreh, Sarah-Maria Fendtc, Peter Carmelieti, Geert Carmelieta,*
aLaboratory of Clinical and Experimental Endocrinology, Department of Chronic Diseases, 
Metabolism and Ageing, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
bLaboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Biology, VIB Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, 3000 
Leuven, Belgium; Laboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Metabolism, Department of Oncology 
and Leuven Cancer Institute (LKI), KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
cLaboratory of Cellular Metabolism and Metabolic Regulation, VIB Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, 
3000 Leuven, Belgium; Laboratory of Cellular Metabolism and Metabolic Regulation, Department 
of Oncology and Leuven Cancer Institute (LKI), KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium
dLaboratory of Molecular and Cellular Signalling, Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
eMolecular and Nanomaterials KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
fCambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0XU, UK
gDepartment of Orthopaedics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
hMetabolomics Expertise Center, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven/VIB Center for Cancer 
Biology Leuven, Belgium
iLaboratory of Angiogenesis and Vascular Biology, VIB Center for Cancer Biology, VIB, 3000 
Leuven, Belgium; State Key Laboratory of Ophtalmology, Zhongshan Ophtalmic Center, Sun Y at-
Sen University, Guangzhou 51006, Guangdong, P .R. China; Laboratory of Angiogenesis and 
*Corresponding Author: Geert Carmeliet, M.D., Ph.D., Laboratory of Clinical and Experimental Endocrinology, Department of 
Chronic Diseases, Metabolism and Ageing, KU Leuven, O&N1 Herestraat 49 bus 902, 3000 Leuven, Belgium, Tel.: 0032 16 330 731, 
Fax: 0032 16 330 718, geert.carmeliet@kuleuven.be.#equal contribution
Author Contributions
G.C. conceived the concept of the study and provided supervision. S.S., K.L. and G.C. designed research. S.S., K.L., G.E., P.F., S.L., 
S.T. and R.V .L. carried out molecular biology and/or in vivo experiments. G.R. and B.G. analysed metabolism by mass spectrometry. 
G.B. performed calcium measurements. S.V . assisted in microscopic analysis. F.M. carried out IR spectroscopy. J.R., M.W. and D.R.E. 
performed mass spectrometry-based analysis of collagen hydroxylation. P.H.M., S.-M.F., P.C. provided necessary materials. S.S., 
K.L., G.E., G.R., P.F., S.L., G.B., S.V ., F.M., M.W., D.R.E., B.G., S.-M.F. and G.C. analysed and interpreted data. S.S, K.L. and G.C. 
wrote the manuscript. All authors agreed on the final version of the manuscript.
Data Availability
Source Data are provided in the online version of the paper, uncropped blots are provided in Supplementary Fig. 1. Any additional 
information required to interpret, replicate or build upon the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 
reasonable request.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2019 January ; 565(7740): 511–515. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-0874-3.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 2 ===
Vascular Metabolism, Department of Oncology and Leuven Cancer Institute (LKI), KU Leuven, 
3000 Leuven, Belgium
Abstract
Endochondral ossification, an important bone formation process in vertebrates, highly depends on 
proper functioning of growth plate chondrocytes1. Their proliferation determines longitudinal 
bone growth and the matrix deposited provides a scaffold for future bone formation. However, 
these two energy-dependent anabolic processes occur in an avascular environment1,2. In addition, 
the centre of the expanding growth plate becomes hypoxic and local activation of the hypoxia-
inducible transcription factor HIF-1α is necessary for chondrocyte survival by still unknown cell-
intrinsic mechanisms3–6. Whether HIF-1α signalling has to be contained in the other regions of 
the growth plate and whether chondrocyte metabolism controls cell function remains undefined. 
We here show that prolonged HIF-1α signalling in chondrocytes leads to skeletal dysplasia by 
interfering with cellular bioenergetics and biosynthesis. Decreased glucose oxidation results in an 
energy deficit, which limits proliferation, activates the unfolded protein response (UPR) and 
reduces collagen synthesis. However, enhanced glutamine flux increases α-ketoglutarate (αKG) 
levels, which in turn increases collagen proline and lysine hydroxylation. This metabolically 
regulated collagen modification renders the cartilaginous matrix more resistant to protease-
mediated degradation and thereby increases bone mass. Thus, inappropriate HIF-1α signalling 
results in skeletal dysplasia caused by collagen overmodification, an effect that may also 
contribute to other extracellular matrix-related diseases such as cancer and fibrosis.
To investigate whether HIF signalling needs to be controlled in growth plate chondrocytes, 
we conditionally inactivated HIF prolyl hydroxylase 2 (PHD2; Phd2chon- mice), its main 
negative regulator7, resulting in HIF-1α accumulation (Extended Data Fig. 1a–d).
This approach caused skeletal dysplasia, characterized by impaired longitudinal bone growth 
and increased trabecular bone mass (Fig. 1a,b, Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). The growth plate 
was shorter, but normally organized and, interestingly, the high bone mass was not due to 
altered bone resorption or formation (Extended Data Fig. 1g–l). Instead, we observed more 
cartilage remnants in the bony trabeculae, evidenced by more type II collagen (COL2)-
positive and proteoglycan-rich matrix (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1m). The decreased 
serum CTx-II levels, measuring COL2 degradation, indicated that the cartilage matrix was 
incompletely resorbed, and the unaltered chondrocyte-to-matrix ratio pointed to a 
qualitative, rather than quantitative, change in matrix properties (Extended Data Fig. 1j,n). 
Thus, inactive oxygen sensing in chondrocytes increases trabecular bone mass, caused by 
abundant cartilage remnants, likely resulting from modifications in the cartilage matrix 
itself.
HIF-1α stabilization in PHD2-deficient chondrocytes resulted, as expected7,8, in metabolic 
reprogramming. Mitochondrial content was reduced, likely because of decreased biogenesis 
without changing autophagy (Extended Data Fig. 2a–c). Consistently, mitochondrial oxygen 
consumption was decreased, making centrally localized chondrocytes less hypoxic 
(Extended Data Fig. 2d,e). Oxidation of glucose and fatty acids, but not glutamine, was 
decreased (Extended Data Fig. 2f). The compensatory increase in glycolytic flux could 
Stegen et al. Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 3 ===
however not avoid energy distress, evidenced by decreased ATP content, energy charge, 
energy status and activation of AMP-activated protein kinase signalling (AMPK) (Fig. 1d, 
Extended Data Fig. 2g–l). Despite the energy deficit, apoptosis was not increased (Extended 
Data Fig. 2m,n). The metabolic changes and energy deficit were HIF-1α-mediated, as they 
were reversed by silencing HIF-1α (Extended Data Fig. 3a–g). Thus, although chondrocytes 
generate the majority (>60%) of their ATP through glycolysis (Extended Data Fig. 2o), they 
require oxidative metabolism to avoid energy distress and HIF-1α signalling needs therefore 
to be controlled.
To survive with an energy deficit, cells decrease their energy-consuming processes9,10, 
effects also observed in PHD2-deficient chondrocytes. Firstly, proliferation was decreased, 
measured by BrdU incorporation (Fig. 1e, Extended Data Fig. 2p). Secondly, ATP-
consuming ion transport mechanisms were reduced, including decreased Na+/K+ ATPase 
protein levels and lower activity of the sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium-ATPase 
(SERCA), shown by reduced Ca2+ release upon addition of SERCA-inhibitor thapsigargin 
(Extended Data Fig. 2q–s). The decreased SERCA activity was caused by the energy deficit, 
as normalizing ATP levels restored the Ca2+ loading capacity of the ER in mutant 
chondrocytes (Extended Data Fig. 2t). Thirdly, energy shortage affected matrix production, 
as abundant energy is required for protein synthesis in specialized secretory cells11. PHD2-
deficient chondrocytes displayed decreased global protein synthesis and synthesis of specific 
proteins including collagen and proteoglycans (Fig. 1f, Extended Data Fig. 2u,v). The 
decreased protein synthesis was not caused by altered activity of mammalian target of 
rapamycin (mTOR), but rather by UPR activation, evidenced by increased levels of binding 
immunoglobulin protein and activation of ER stress sensors (Extended Data Fig. 4a–h). The 
decreased proliferation and protein synthesis were restored by HIF-1α knockdown 
(Extended Data Fig. 3h–k). Thus, the energy stress in PHD2-deficient chondrocytes reduces 
energy expenditure, including proliferation and protein synthesis.
Despite the decreased collagen synthesis by PHD2-deficient chondrocytes, total and 
extracellular COL2 content was increased, as demonstrated by gel electrophoresis, 
immunostaining, Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy and transmission electron 
microscopy (Fig. 1f, 2a; Extended Data Fig. 5a–d). To explain this apparent controversy, we 
hypothesized that collagen turnover was decreased because of altered posttranslational 
modifications. Transcript levels of collagen modifying enzymes were increased in mutant 
chondrocytes (Fig. 2b), including collagen prolyl hydroxylases (P4HA1–2 associated with 
protein disulphide isomerase (PDI) and P3H1), lysine hydroxylases (PLOD1–2) and lysyl 
oxidase (LOX). Hydroxylation of proline enhances the stability of the collagen triple helices 
and the lysine modifications increase crosslinking12. Accordingly, hydroxyproline content 
was increased, mainly because numerous proline residues in COL2 were more often 
hydroxylated (Fig. 2c,d, Extended Data Fig. 5e,f). Hydroxylation of Lysine 87 occurred also 
more frequently, which, together with the increased Lox levels, explains the higher 
hydroxylysylpyridinoline (HP) cross-link content and total pyridinoline levels (Fig. 2e, 
Extended Data Fig. 5e). These data indicate that the collagen fibrils were significantly more 
cross-linked in mutant growth plates. Collagen modifications can affect collagen 
breakdown13,14 and, indeed, mutant collagen fibres were more resistant to degradation by 
matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) or MMP13 (Fig. 2f). These findings explain the 
Stegen et al. Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 4 ===
decreased CTx-II serum levels, the increased collagen density in the growth plates and the 
presence of cartilage remnants in Phd2chon- mice (Fig. 1c, 2a; Extended Data Fig. 1j). 
Moreover, increased collagen cross-linking promotes extracellular matrix mineralization15, 
which clarifies the increased mineralization of mutant growth plates (Extended Data Fig. 
5g–j). These effects were HIF-1α-mediated, as decreasing HIF-1α levels in PHD2-deficient 
chondrocytes was sufficient to reverse the increased hydroxyproline levels, to prevent the 
accumulation of collagen remnants and to normalize bone mass in an ectopic model of 
endochondral ossification16 (Extended Data Fig. 3l, 6a,d,e). Of note, prolyl/lysine 
hydroxylation and MMP-mediated degradation of COL1 produced by osteogenic cells was 
not altered, indicating a COL2-specific effect (Extended Data Fig. 5k–n). Thus, HIF-1α-
induced metabolic changes in PHD2-deficient chondrocytes reduce collagen synthesis but 
enhance collagen modifications, resulting in a denser collagen matrix that hinders cartilage 
degradation.
The enzyme activity of P4HA, P3H1 and PLOD highly depends on the availability of the 
metabolic co-substrate αKG, relative to the inhibitory metabolites succinate and 
fumarate17,18. Consistent with the increased enzyme levels in PHD2-deficient chondrocytes, 
intracellular αKG levels were increased by 400% in a HIF-dependent manner, resulting in a 
higher αKG/succinate (2.2-fold) and αKG/fumarate (2.3-fold) ratio (Fig. 3a; Extended data 
Fig. 3m, 7a,b). The increased αKG levels did not derive from glucose but from glutamine, 
through increased HIF-1α-regulated expression of glutaminase 1 (GLS1) (Fig. 3b, Extended 
Data Fig. 7c–e). Of note, glutamine was primarily metabolized in the TCA cycle via 
reductive carboxylation (Extended Data Fig. 7f,g). The increased conversion of glutamine to 
αKG to favour collagen hydroxylation distinguishes chondrocytes from tumour cells in two 
aspects. First, metastasizing breast tumour cells metabolize pyruvate to αKG to control 
collagen synthesis and modification19. We excluded extracellular pyruvate as nutritional 
source for αKG in chondrocytes, as blocking the pyruvate transporter monocarboxylate 
transporter 2 did not affect collagen and bone properties in wild-type and PHD2-deficient 
cells/mice (Extended Data Fig. 8a–i). Second, in many malignant cells, glutamine functions 
as a carbon donor for the synthesis of proline20, a major building block of collagen. 
However, deletion of PHD2 did not alter the fractional contribution from 13C5-glutamine to 
proline in chondrocytes and did not affect intracellular proline levels (Extended Data Fig. 
5o,p). Together, these data suggest that PHD2 inactivation stimulates, via GLS1, the flux of 
glutamine to αKG, which is not only used to supply the TCA cycle, but also to support 
αKG-dependent collagen hydroxylation.
To validate the importance of αKG availability for collagen hydroxylation, we used two 
approaches. First, administration of dimethyl-αKG to wild-type cells/mice did not affect 
energy homeostasis or expenditure, but increased growth plate hydroxyproline levels, 
resulting in more COL2-positive cartilage remnants and increased bone mass, and 
importantly, these effects were not caused by HIF-1α-driven gene expression (Extended 
Data Fig. 9a–k). Of note, αKG-treated mutant mice did not display further changes in 
collagen or bone, likely because collagen hydroxylase activity was already maximal 
(Extended Data Fig. 9a–k). Secondly, treating PHD2-deficient chondrocytes/mice with the 
GLS1 inhibitor bis-2-(5-phenylacetamido-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-yl)ethyl sulphide (BPTES) 
decreased intracellular αKG levels, because fractional contribution from 13C5-glutamine 
Stegen et al. Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 5 ===
was reduced, thereby normalizing the enhanced hydroxyproline levels, the increased amount 
of COL2-positive cartilage remnants and the higher bone volume (Fig. 3c,d; Extended Data 
Fig. 7a,e,h,i). This BPTES-induced decrease in αKG had no effect on the increased HIF-1α 
levels or its target enzymes involved in collagen hydroxylation, nor on energy-related 
parameters (Extended Data Fig. 7j–o). Administration of dimethyl-αKG to BPTES-treated 
mutant cells/mice re-established the mutant phenotype with respect to collagen levels and 
bone volume (Fig. 3c,d, Extended Data Fig. 7h,i), further confirming that PHD2-deficient 
chondrocytes rely on glutamine-derived αKG to support enhanced collagen hydroxylation. 
Of note, GLS1 inhibition also negatively affected collagen and bone properties in wild-type 
mice, but impaired chondrocyte proliferation as well, suggesting that glutamine metabolism 
controls multiple cell functions during bone development (Fig. 3c,d, Extended Data Fig. 
7h,i, m,n). Finally, the effects of pharmacological GLS1 inhibition were confirmed 
genetically in vitro and in vivo, using an ectopic endochondral bone formation model 
(Extended Data Fig. 6b,d–f,h–k). Together, these data indicate that the primary role of 
glutamine in PHD2-deficient chondrocytes is not to support oxidative ATP generation, but to 
facilitate collagen hydroxylation.
Glucose metabolism, on the other hand, controls energy balance in PHD2-deficient 
chondrocytes, as the switch from glucose oxidation to glycolysis resulted in energy deficit 
(Fig. 1d, Extended Data Fig. 2f–l). To confirm, we treated PHD2-deficient chondrocytes 
with the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK) inhibitor dichloroacetic acid (DCA), 
resulting in increased glucose oxidation and oxygen consumption rate, without affecting 
palmitate and glutamine oxidation, but causing reduced glycolysis (Extended Data Fig. 10a–
e). DCA treatment had no effect in wild-type cells. Restoring glucose oxidation in PHD2-
deficient chondrocytes by blocking PDK corrected the energy deficit, restored proliferation 
and prevented UPR activation, accompanied by increased collagen synthesis and 
hydroxyproline levels (Fig. 4a,b, Extended Data Fig. 10f–j). These metabolic changes 
further augmented the COL2-positive cartilage remnants and, consequently, mineralized 
bone mass (Fig. 4c, Extended Data Fig. 10k,l). In line, silencing PDK1 using shRNA 
normalized proliferation of PHD2-deficient chondrocytes and resulted in accumulation of 
cartilage remnants in ectopic bone ossicles (Extended Data Fig. 6c–e,g–k). The observation 
of more abundant cartilage remnants in DCA-treated mutant mice can be explained by the 
restored collagen synthesis combined with the increased αKG levels, which favour collagen 
hydroxylation. Indeed, co-administration of BPTES to DCA-treated mutant mice normalized 
the increase in αKG and hydroxyproline levels, COL2-positive cartilage remnants and 
mineralized bone mass to the levels of wild-type mice, changes that were not caused by 
transcriptional effects (Fig. 4c; Extended Data Fig. 10j–n). Taken together, confined HIF 
signalling permits oxidative glucose metabolism in chondrocytes to maintain optimal energy 
balance during endochondral ossification.
Thus, despite their avascular environment, growth plate chondrocytes require PHD2-
regulated HIF-1α inactivation to avoid metabolically induced skeletal dysplasia. Glycolysis 
is the most important energy-producing pathway in chondrocytes, but glucose oxidation is 
needed for adequate proliferation and protein synthesis, and these pathways thus require 
controlled HIF-1α activation. Furthermore, HIF-1α signalling not only regulates collagen 
modifications transcriptionally, but also metabolically by controlling glutamine-derived co-
Stegen et al. Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 6 ===
substrate levels that stimulate enzyme activity. Together, the PHD2 oxygen sensor is a 
central gatekeeper of chondrocyte metabolism that controls bone growth and mass. Our 
findings also hold important translational implications, as several pathologies are associated 
with changes in extracellular matrix deposition and/or remodelling such as cancer21 (as 
shown by Elia et al.19), osteogenesis imperfecta22 and fibrosis23. Further research is 
warranted to explore the therapeutic potential of metabolically targeting the collagen defects 
in these diseases23,24.
Methods
Animals
Chondrocyte-specific deletion of PHD2 was obtained by crossing Phd2fl/fl mice (exon 2 was 
flanked by LoxP sites, mice were generated as described before25) with transgenic mice 
expressing Cre recombinase under the control of the type II collagen (Col2) gene promoter26 
(Col2-Cre+ Phd2fl/fl, referred to as Phd2chon-). Col2-Cre- Phd2fl/fl (referred to as Phd2chon+) 
littermates were used as controls in all experiments. Analysis was performed on 2.5 day-old 
(P2.5), 10 day-old (P10) or 14-week-old male mice unless stated otherwise. Dichloroacetic 
acid (DCA; 100 μg/g body weight), bis-2-(5 phenylacetamido-1, 2, 4-thiadiazol-2-yl) ethyl 
sulphide (BPTES; 25 μg/g body weight), dimethyl-α-ketoglutarate (dimethyl-αKG; 50 μg/g 
body weight) or α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (MCT2 inhibitor, MCT2i; 60 μg/g body 
weight) were administered daily via intraperitoneal injection from P2.5 to P9.5. DCA, 
BPTES and dimethyl-αKG were dissolved in DMSO, α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid was 
dissolved in a mix containing 1.5% DMSO, 60% β-cyclodextrin, 35% polyethylene glycol 
and 5% ethanol and pH neutralized with NaOH. All components were from Sigma-Aldrich. 
For mouse experiments, researchers blinded to the group allocation performed analysis. 
Mice were bred in conventional conditions in our animal housing facility. All procedures 
involving animals and their care were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and 
Research Advisory Committee of the KU Leuven.
Southern blot analysis was used to assess the recombination efficiency and specificity in 
Phd2chon- mice. Genomic DNA was digested overnight with EcoR1. Fragments were 
separated on a 0.7% agarose gel, which was subsequently incubated for 30 minutes in 
denaturation buffer (0.5 M NaOH, 1.5 M NaCl), followed by 30 minutes in neutralization 
buffer (1.5 M NaCl, 0.5 M Tris-HCl pH 7.2, 1 mM EDTA). The gel was then soaked in 10x 
SSC solution for 10 minutes prior to capillary transfer overnight. The blot was incubated 
with a probe (PCR fragment from genomic sequence) which was labeled with 32P-CTP 
using the RedPrime II Random Prime labeling System (GE Healthcare) according to 
manufacturer’s instructions.
Cell culture
Isolation and culture of growth plate chondrocytes—Primary growth plate 
chondrocytes were isolated as described before27. Briefly, chondrocytes were isolated from 
growth plates of the proximal tibia and distal femur of 5-day-old mice. After removal of the 
perichondrium, isolated growth plates were pre-digested on a shaker for 30 minutes at room 
temperature with 0.1% collagenase type II (Gibco) dissolved in culture medium 
Stegen et al. Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 7 ===
(DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS), 100 units/ml 
penicillin, 50 μg/ml streptomycin, 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid, and 100 μg/ml sodium pyruvate; 
all from Gibco). The remaining growth plate fragments were subsequently digested in 0.2% 
collagenase type II for 3 hours on an incubator shaker at 37°C. The obtained cell suspension 
of the second digest was filtered through a 40 μm nylon mesh and single cells were 
recovered by centrifugation. Primary chondrocytes were seeded at a density of 5.7×105 
cells/cm2 and medium was changed every other day. Cells were treated with DCA (1 mM), 
BPTES (5 μM), dimethyl-αKG (0.5 mM), MCT2i (1.5 mM), chloroquine (10 μM) or 
DMSO as vehicle-control.
Chondrocyte micromass cultures—To assess micromass mineralization, 2×105 
chondrocytes were seeded in a 10 μl droplet of growth medium and left to adhere for 2 
hours. Subsequently, growth medium supplemented with 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid and 4 mM 
β-glycerophosphate (both Sigma-Aldrich) was added. After 6 days, micromasses were 
stained with Alizarin Red and Alizarin Red staining intensity was quantified by measuring 
absorbance at 405 nm after dye extraction with 10% acetic acid.
Primary osteoclast culture—For in vitro osteoclast formation, bone marrow cells 
(collected by flushing long bones) were plated overnight in αMEM containing 10% FCS, 
100 units/ml penicillin and 50 μg/ml streptomycin (all from Gibco). Non-adherent cells were 
collected after 72 hours and plated in αMEM supplemented with 20 ng/ml macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF; Bio-Techne) and 100 ng/ml receptor activator of nuclear 
factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL; Peprotech) (i.e. day 1). At day 6, osteoclast differentiation 
was assessed by TRAP-staining. Cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes, 
followed by permeabilization with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 1 minute and incubation in 0.1 M 
sodium acetate containing naphtol AS-MX phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich), Fast Red violet LB 
salt (Sigma-Aldrich) and dimethylformamide (Merck). Positively stained cells containing 3 
or more nuclei were considered as osteoclasts.
Periosteal cell culture—Skeletal progenitor cells from the periosteum were isolated as 
described before16. Briefly, stromal cells from the periosteum were released by a twofold 
collagenase-dispase digest (3 mg/ml collagenase and 4 mg/ml dispase) and cultured in 
αMEM with 2 mM glutaMAX™-1, containing 10% FCS, 100 units/ml penicillin and 50 
μg/ml streptomycin (all from Gibco).
Isolation and culture of primary osteoblasts—Primary osteoblasts were isolated 
from the calvaria of 5-day-old mice or from the long bones of 8-week-old mice as previously 
described28. Primary calvarial osteoblasts were prepared by six sequential digestions in a 
collagenase-dispase mixture (3 mg/ml collagenase and 4 mg/ml dispase in αMEM with 2 
mM glutaMAX™-1, containing 100 units/ml penicillin and 50 μg/ml streptomycin). Cells 
isolated in fractions 2 to 6 were pooled and cultured until confluence in αMEM with 2 mM 
glutaMAX™-1, containing 10% FCS, 100 units/ml penicillin and 50 μg/ml streptomycin. To 
isolate trabecular osteoblasts, long bones were first incubated in collagenase-dispase mixture 
for 20 minutes at 37°C to remove remaining periosteal cells. Next, epiphyses were cut away 
and bone marrow was flushed out. The remaining bone was cut into small pieces and 
Stegen et al. Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 8 ===
trabecular osteoblasts were isolated by incubating the fragments with the collagenase-
dispase mixture for 30 minutes at 37°C. Cells were passed through a 70 μm nylon mesh (BD 
Falcon), washed twice and cultured in αMEM with 2 mM glutaMAX™-1, containing 10% 
FCS, 100 units/ml penicillin and 50 μg/ml streptomycin.
Knockdown strategies—To silence HIF-1α (5’-
CCGGTGGATAGCGATATGGTCAATGCTCGAGCATTGACCATATCGCTATCCATTTTT
G-3’), GLS1 (5’-
CCGGGAGGGAAGGTTGCTGATTATACTCGAGTATAATCAGCAACCTTCCCTCTTTT
TG-3’) or PDK1 (5’-
CCGGGCCTGTTAGATTGGCAAATATCTCGAGATATTTGCCAATCTAACAGGCTTTTT
G-3’), we transduced cells in the presence of 8 μg/ml polybrene (Sigma-Aldrich) with a 
lentivirus carrying gene-targeting shRNA (MOI 25) as described before29,30. A nonsense 
scrambled shRNA sequence was used as negative control. To silence PHD2 in periosteal 
cells, we transduced cells isolated from Phd2fl/fl mice with an adenovirus carrying a Cre 
recombinase. An adenovirus carrying an empty vector was used as negative control. After 24 
hours, virus-containing medium was changed to normal culture medium and 48 hours later, 
cells were used for further experiments.
RNA analysis
RNA was isolated and purified with the RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN) according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was synthesized from 1 μg RNA using reverse 
transcriptase Superscript II RT (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Analysis of gene expression was 
performed by Taqman quantitative RT-PCR using custom-made primers and probes, or 
premade primer sets (Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc.). Expression levels were 
normalized relative to the expression of Hprt. For quantification of gene expression, ΔΔCt 
method was used. Sequences or premade primer set identification numbers are available 
upon request.
Protein analyses by Western blot and ELISA
For whole cell lysates, cells were rinsed with ice-cold PBS and lysed in a total cell lysis 
buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP40, 1% sodium 
desoxycholate, supplemented with 1 mM PMSF, 5 μg/ml aprotinine, 5 μg/ml leupeptin and 
0.33 μg/ml antipain). Nuclear protein fractions were prepared by lysing the cells first in a 
hypotonic buffer (20 mM Hepes pH 7.9, 10 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5% 
NP40, 1 mM DTT, supplemented with 1 mM Na3VO4, 20 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, 5 μg/ml 
aprotinine, 5 μg/ml leupeptin and 0.33 μg/ml antipain) for 15 minutes at 4°C, followed by 
mechanical disruption of the cell membranes. Nuclei were pelleted from the lysates by 
centrifugation. The pellet was resuspended in a nuclear extraction buffer (50 mM Hepes pH 
7.9, 500 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, supplemented with 1 mM PMSF, 5 μg/ml aprotinine, 5 μg/ml 
leupeptin and 0.33 μg/ml antipain) and after sonication incubated for 15 minutes at 4°C. 
Protein concentrations were determined with the BCA Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific).
Stegen et al. Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 9 ===
Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE under reducing conditions and transferred to a 
nitrocellulose membrane (GE Healthcare). Membranes were blocked with 5% dry milk or 
bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich) in Tris-buffered saline with 0.1% Tween-20 for 60 
minutes at room temperature and incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies against 
PHD2 (Bio-Techne), HIF-1α (Bio-Techne), HIF-2α (Abcam), phosphorylated AMPK 
(Threonin 172, p-AMPKT172; Cell Signaling Technologies), AMPK (Cell Signaling 
Technologies), Na+/K+ ATPase (Cell Signaling Technologies), LC3-II (Cell Signaling 
Technologies), C-MYC (Cell Signaling Technologies) BiP (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies), 
phosphorylated eIF2α (Cell Signaling Technologies), eIF2α (Cell Signaling Technologies), 
ATF4 (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies), ATF6 (Bio-Techne), COL2 (Merck), glutaminase 1 
(GLS1; Abcam), GLS2 (Bio-Techne), phosphorylated mTOR (Serine 2448, p-mTORS2448; 
Cell Signaling Technologies), mTOR (Cell Signaling Technologies), phosphorylated p70 S6 
kinase (Threonine 389, p-p70 S6KT389; Serine 371, p-p70 S6KS371; Cell Signaling 
Technologies), p70 S6K (Cell Signaling Technologies), phosphorylated S6 (Serine 235 and 
236, S6S235/236; Cell Signaling Technologies), S6 (Cell Signaling Technologies), 
phosphorylated 4E-BP1 (Threonine 37/46, p-4E-BP1T37/46; Cell Signaling Technologies), 
4E-BP1 (Cell Signaling Technologies), β-actin (Sigma-Aldrich) and Lamin A/C (Santa Cruz 
Biotechnologies). Signals were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (Western 
Lightning Plus ECL; PerkinElmer) after incubation with appropriate HRP-conjugated 
secondary antibodies (Dako). Protein levels were quantified relative to loading control or 
non-phosphorylated protein.
Proliferation and apoptosis were quantified by ELISA assays. Proliferation was measured by 
5’-bromo-2’-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation, added during the last 4 hours, using the 
Cell Proliferation Biotrack ELISA system (GE Healthcare). Apoptosis was assessed using 
the Cell Death Detection ELISAplus kit (Sigma-Aldrich). All ELISAs were performed 
according to manufacturer’s instructions and values were normalized to the amount of DNA.
Metabolism assays
Glucose oxidation—For glucose oxidation29, cells were incubated for 5 hours in growth 
medium containing 0.55 μCi/ml [6-14C]-D-glucose (PerkinElmer). To stop cellular 
metabolism, 250 μl of a 2 M perchloric acid solution was added and wells were covered with 
a Whatman paper soaked with 1x hyamine hydroxide. 14CO2 released during the oxidation 
of glucose was absorbed into the paper overnight at room temperature. Radioactivity in the 
paper was determined by liquid scintillation counting, and values were normalized to DNA 
content.
Glutamine oxidation—Cells were incubated for 6 hours in growth medium containing 0.5 
μCi/ml [U-14C]-glutamine (PerkinElmer)29. Thereafter, 250 μl of 2 M perchloric acid was 
added to each well to stop cellular metabolism and 14CO2 was collected as described above 
for glucose oxidation.
Fatty acid oxidation—Palmitate β-oxidation29 was measured after incubation of the cells 
with 2 μCi/ml [9,10-3H]-palmitic acid (PerkinElmer) for 2 hours. Then, the culture medium 
was transferred into glass vials sealed with rubber caps. 3H2O was captured in hanging wells 
Stegen et al. Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 10 ===
containing a Whatman paper soaked with H2O over a period of 48 hours at 37°C. 
Radioactivity in the paper was determined by liquid scintillation counting, and values were 
normalized to DNA content.
Glycolysis—For measurement of the glycolytic flux29, cells were incubated for 2 hours in 
growth medium containing 0.4 μCi/ml [5-3H]-D-glucose (PerkinElmer). 3H2O was captured 
and measured analogously to fatty acid oxidation.
Oxygen consumption—The oxygen consumption rate29 was quantified using an XF24 
analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience Europe). Cells were seeded on Seahorse XF24 tissue culture 
plates. The assay medium was unbuffered DMEM supplemented with 5 mM D-glucose and 
2 mM L-glutamine, pH 7.4 (all from Gibco). The measurement of oxygen consumption was 
performed during 10 minute-intervals (2 minutes mixing, 2 minutes recovery, 6 minutes 
measuring) for 3 hours, and values were normalized to DNA content.
Glucose consumption and lactate production—Lactate and glucose concentration in 
conditioned culture medium was measured using a Dimension analyzer (Siemens Healthcare 
Diagnostics) and results were normalized to DNA content.
Energy levels—For determination of energy charge and status, cells were harvested in ice 
cold 0.4 M perchloric acid supplemented with 0.5 mM EDTA. ATP, ADP and AMP were 
measured using ion-pair reversed phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) as 
previously described29,30. Energy balance was calculated as ([ATP] + ½ [ADP]) / ([ATP] + 
[ADP] + [AMP]) and energy status was determined as the ratio of ATP over AMP. 
Intracellular ATP levels were also measured using the ATPlite ATP detection assay 
(PerkinElmer) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and values were normalized to 
DNA content.
Mass spectrometry—For 13C-carbon incorporation from glucose and glutamine in 
metabolites, cells were incubated for 72 hours with 13C6-glucose or 13C5-glutamine (both 
from Sigma-Aldrich). Metabolites for subsequent mass spectrometry (MS) analysis were 
prepared by quenching the cells in liquid nitrogen follow by a cold two-phase methanol-
water-chloroform extraction29,31,32. Phase separation was achieved by centrifugation at 4 
°C. The methanol-water phase containing polar metabolites was separated and dried using a 
vacuum concentrator. Dried metabolite samples were stored at −80 °C.
Gas chromatography-mass spectrometric analysis: Polar metabolites were derivatized 
and measured as described before29,31,32. In brief, polar metabolites were derivatized with 
20 mg/ml methoxyamine in pyridine for 90 minutes at 37 °C and subsequently with N-(tert-
butyldimethylsilyl)-N-methyl-trifluoroacetamide, with 1% tert-butyldimethylchlorosilane for 
60 minutes at 60 °C. Metabolites were measured with a 7890A GC system (Agilent 
Technologies) combined with a 5975C Inert MS system (Agilent Technologies). One 
microliter of sample was injected in splitless mode with an inlet temperature of 270 °C onto 
a DB35MS column. The carrier gas was helium with a flow rate of 1 ml/min. For the 
measurement of polar metabolites, the GC oven was held at 100 °C for 3 minutes and then 
ramped to 300 °C with a gradient of 2.5 °C/min. The MS system was operated under 
Stegen et al. Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 11 ===
electron impact ionization at 70 eV and a mass range of 100–650 atomic mass units (amu) 
was scanned. Mass distribution vectors were extracted from the raw ion chromatograms 
using a custom Matlab M-file, which applies consistent integration bounds and baseline 
correction to each ion. Moreover, we corrected for naturally occurring isotopes. Total 
contribution of carbon was calculated using the following equation33:
total contribution of carbon =
∑i = 0
n i *mi 
n* ∑i = 0
n mi
where n is the number of C atoms in the metabolite, i represents the different mass 
isotopomers and m refers to the abundance of a certain mass. For metabolite levels, arbitrary 
units of the metabolites of interest were normalized to an internal standard and DNA 
content.
Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometric analysis: For assessing glutamine 
consumption, glutamine levels were measured in conditioned medium using liquid 
chromatography-mass spectrometry. Polar metabolites were measured as described before34. 
Polar metabolites were resuspended in 60% acetonitrile. Targeted measurements of polar 
metabolites were performed with a 1290 Infinity II HPLC (Agilent) coupled to a 6470 triple 
quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent). Samples were injected onto a iHILIC-Fusion(P) 
column. The solvent, composed of acetonitrile and ammonium acetate (10 mM, pH 9.3), was 
used at a flow rate of 0.100 ml/min. Data analysis was performed with the Agilent Mass 
Hunter software. Metabolite levels were normalized to DNA content.
Mitochondrial content—The mitochondrial content was analysed after rhodamine 
labelling by confocal microscopy on a Zeiss LSM 510 META system (Zeiss) as described 
before35. Briefly, chondrocytes were seeded on coverslips and pulse-loaded with 200 μM 
rhodamine 123 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 40 seconds at room temperature. After 
loading, cells were thoroughly washed with HEPES-Tris medium (132 mM NaCl, 4.2 mM 
KCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 5.5 mM D-glucose and 10 mM HEPES pH 7.4) before 
mounting coverslips with Fluomount (Dako).
Collagen analysis
Protein translation—Collagen, proteoglycan or total protein synthesis was quantified in 
vitro, by incubation of cultured chondrocytes with 20 uCi/ml 3H-proline (PerkinElmer), 35S-
sulphate (PerkinElmer) or 35S-methionine (MP Biomedicals), respectively, as described 
before36,37. Briefly, after overnight labelling, cells were lysed in extraction buffer (11% 
acetic acid H2O with 0.25% BSA) to quantify collagen and total protein synthesis and 
proteins were precipitated by the addition of 20% trichloroacetic acid. For the analysis of 
proteoglycan synthesis, cells were lysed in 0.2 M NaOH and proteoglycans were 
precipitated with 1% cetylpyridinium chloride. Radioactivity was determined by liquid 
scintillation counting, and normalized for DNA content.
Collagen content—Intact type II collagen α-chains were solubilized using a guanidine-
based extraction method. Briefly, growth plates were cut into smaller pieces, washed with 
Stegen et al. Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 12 ===
150 mM NaCl, 0.05 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and proteoglycans were solubilized with 4 M 
guanidine HCl, 0.05 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5, with protease inhibitors (1 mM PMSF, 5 μg/ml 
aprotinine, 5 μg/ml leupeptin and 0.33 μg/ml antipain) for 24 hours at 4°C. Collagens were 
solubilized with 1mg/ml pepsin in 3% acetic acid for 24 hours at 4°C. After centrifugation, 
supernatant was dialyzed against 0.4 M NaCl, 0.01 M EDTA, 0.05 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5 two 
times for 24 hours at 4°C, collagen α-chains were resolved by SDS-PAGE and afterwards 
stained with Coomassie Blue R-250 (Sigma-Aldrich).
Collagen hydroxylation analysis using electrospray MS—Preparation of type I and 
type II collagens from adult bone and neonatal growth plates was performed as described in 
Weiss et al38. Briefly, bone was demineralized in 0.1 M HCl at 4°C, washed, and solubilized 
by heat denaturation in SDS-PAGE sample buffer. For the growth plate, proteoglycans were 
removed with 4 M guanidine HCl, 0.05 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.5 with protease inhibitors (5 mM 
1,10-phenanthroline and 2 mM PMSF) for 24 hours at 4°C and the residue was washed 
thoroughly. Collagens were solubilized with pepsin (1:20, pepsin/dry tissue) in 3% acetic 
acid for 24 hours at 4°C, and were run on 6% SDS-PAGE gels. After in-gel trypsin 
digestion, electrospray MS was performed using an LTQ XL ion-trap mass spectrometer 
equipped with in-line liquid chromatography (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a C4 5 μm 
capillary column (300μm x 150mm; Higgins Analytical RS-15M3-W045) eluted at 4.5 μl/
min. Proteome Discoverer search software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide 
identification using the NCBI protein database. Proline and lysine modifications were 
examined manually by scrolling or averaging the full scan over several minutes so that all of 
the post-translational variations of a given peptide appeared together in the full scan.
Hydroxyproline content—Hydroxyproline content was quantified by a colorimetric 
protocol as described by Creemers et al39. Briefly, neonatal growth plates or cultured cells 
were hydrolysed for 3.5 hours at 135°C in 6 N HCl. To distinguish between hydroxyproline 
content in cell extracts and extracellular matrix of cultured cells, we detached cells with 10 
mM NaHPO4, 150 mM NaCl and 0.5% Triton X-100 and hydrolysis was subsequently 
performed on either the cell extract or the deposited matrix. Thereafter, samples were 
vacuum-evaporated and dissolved in demineralized water. Next, hydroxyproline residues 
were oxidized by adding chloramine-T, followed by the addition of Ehrlich’s aldehyde 
reagent and incubation of the samples at 65°C for chromophore development. A standard 
curve was made to calculate the absolute amount of hydroxyproline per sample, which was 
finally normalized to tissue wet weight. To assess collagen-resistance to MMP-mediated 
degradation, neonatal growth plates or crushed metaphyseal bone was incubated with MMP9 
(0.4 ng/μl; Bio-Techne) or MMP-13 (0.2 ng/μl; Bio-Techne) for 24 hours at 37°C prior to 
hydrolysis of remaining tissue and supernatant.
Cartilage collagen cross-link analysis—Collagen cross-link analysis was performed 
by HPLC on growth plates isolated from 5-day-old mice after acid hydrolysis as previously 
described40. The amount of collagen cross-links was normalized for tissue wet weight.
Stegen et al. Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 13 ===
Intracellular Ca2+ measurements
The intracellular Ca2+ concentration [Ca2+]i was measured using the ratiometric fluorescent 
Ca2+ dye Fura2-AM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the FlexStation3 (Molecular Devices) as 
previously described41,42. The Ca2+ content of the ER was measured by applying 
thapsigargin (2 μM; Sigma-Aldrich) in the presence of 3 mM EGTA (a cell-impermeable 
Ca2+ chelator, added 30 seconds prior to thapsigargin treatment) and quantifying the rise in 
F340/F380. Normalized Ca2+-rise (R) in the cytosol of cultured chondrocytes was calculated 
as (R-R0)/R0. The basal F340/380 signals were calibrated to obtain basal cytosolic [Ca2+] as 
described before43. The total Ca2+-loading capacity of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in 
the presence of exogenously added Mg/ATP (5 mM) and mitochondrial inhibitors (10 mM 
NaN3) was analyzed in plasma membrane-permeabilised chondrocytes using unidirectional 
45Ca2+ uptake (0.3 MBq/ml) experiments performed as described before44, allowing direct 
access to ER Ca2+ stores. The ER 45Ca2+ loading capacity was normalized to protein 
content.
Transmission electron microscopy and Fourier transform infrared microscopy
Transmission electron microscopy of the epiphyseal growth plate was performed following 
standard procedures45. Briefly, growth plates isolated from neonatal mice were fixed in 2.5% 
glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M Na-cacodylate buffer pH 7.3. Next, the growth plate were post-fixed 
in 2% osmiumtetroxide in Na-cacodylate buffer, followed by dehydration in a graded 
ethanol series and staining with 1% uranyl acetate in 70% ethanol. Following further 
dehydration, the samples were impregnated overnight in a desiccator with freshly prepared 
Agar 100 (EPON 812 medium), initiated by means of a graded propylene oxide – Agar 100 
series. Consequently, samples were transferred to freshly prepared Agar 100 and placed in a 
desiccator for 6 hours. Ultra-thin sections (70 nm) were made, positioned on a copper grid, 
and contrasted with 4% uranyl acetate and lead citrate. TEM images were made on a JEOL 
JEM 2100 electron microscope (JEOL) at 200 kV .
Fourier transform infrared microscopy (FTIR) data were acquired from methyl metacrylate 
(MMA) tibia sections of neonatal mice, mounted on CaF2 windows, on a Bruker IFS66 
spectrometer equipped with an IR microscope and liquid nitrogen cooled mercury cadmium 
telluride detector. Collagen content in the growth plate was calculated from the integrated 
area of the amide I absorption peak (1590–1695 cm−1), after baseline correction for the 
absorption spectrum of MMA.
Ectopic bone ossicle model
As a model for endochondral ossification, we used a recently described ectopic bone ossicle 
model16. Briefly, periosteal cells were isolated and cultured in αMEM with 2 mM 
glutaMAX™-1, containing 10% FCS, 100 units/ml penicillin and 50 μg/ml streptomycin 
supplemented with 5 U/ml heparin (LEO Pharma) and 5 ng/ml human recombinant 
fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF 2) (R&D Systems) to induce chondrogenic differentiation 
upon implantation. At passage 3, FGF2-pretreated periosteal cells were embedded in a type I 
collagen gel (5 mg/ml in PBS; Corning GmbH) at a density of 1×107 cells/ml, and 100 μl 
was injected subcutaneously as previously described16. Three weeks after implantation, 
Stegen et al. Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 14 ===
bone ossicles were collected, fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde, and processed for microCT and 
histological analysis.
MicroCT
We performed microCT analysis of mineralized bone mass using a desktop micro-
tomographic image system and related software, as described before46. Briefly, tibias were 
scanned using the SkyScan 1172 microCT system (Bruker) at a pixel size of 5 μm with 50 
kV tube voltage and 0.5 mm aluminum filter. Projection data was reconstructed using the 
NRecon software (Bruker), trabecular and cortical volumes of interest were selected 
manually and 3D morphometric parameters were calculated using CT Analyzer software 
(Bruker) according to the guidelines of the American Society for Bone and Mineral 
Research47.
DEXA
Body composition (lean body mass and total fat mass) was analysed in vivo by DEXA 
(PIXImus densitometer; Lunar Corp.) using ultra high resolution (0.18 × 0.18 pixels, 
resolution of 1.6 line pairs/mm) and software version 1.4548.
Serum biochemistry
Serum osteocalcin was measured by an in-house radioimmunoassay49. Serum CTx-I and 
CTx-II levels were measured by a RatLaps and Serum Preclinical Cartilaps ELISA kit 
(Immunodiagnostic Systems), respectively.
(Immuno)Histochemistry and histomorphometry
Histochemical staining—Histomorphometric analysis of murine long bones was 
performed as previously described3,27. Briefly, osteoblasts were quantified on H&E-stained 
sections, whereas osteoclasts were visualized on TRAP-stained sections. Unmineralized 
(osteoid) and mineralized bone matrix was quantified on Goldner or V on Kossa-stained 
sections, respectively. To analyze dynamic bone parameters, calcein (16 mg/kg body weight; 
Sigma-Aldrich) was administered via intraperitoneal injection 4 days and 1 day prior to 
sacrifice. Cartilage matrix proteoglycans were visualized by Safranin O staining. To detect 
apoptosis, TUNEL staining was performed on paraffin-embedded sections with an In Situ 
Cell Death Detection Kit (Roche). Sections were permeabilised for 2 minutes on ice in 0.1% 
sodium citrate containing 0.1% Triton X-100. TUNEL reaction mixture was applied for 1 
hour at 37°C. Sections were counterstained with Hoechst to visualize nuclei.
Immunohistochemical staining—To visualize hypoxic regions or cell proliferation29, 
mice were injected with pimonidazole (Hypoxyprobe-1 PLUS Kit, Natural Pharmacia 
International; 60 μg/g body weight) or BrdU (Harlan SeraLab; 150 μg/g body weight), 
respectively, prior to sacrifice. Immunohistochemical staining conditions were slightly 
adapted according to the type of tissue and the antibody used. Generally, paraffin sections 
were de-waxed, rehydrated, incubated with Antigen Retrieval Solution (Dako) and washed 
in TBS. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by immersing the sections in 0.3% 
H2O2 in methanol for 20 minutes. Unspecific antibody binding was blocked by incubation 
Stegen et al. Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 15 ===
of the sections in 2% BSA-supplemented TBS for 30 minutes. Subsequently, sections were 
incubated overnight with primary antibody against pimonidazole (hypoxic regions), COL1 
(bone; Bio-Techne), COL2 (cartilage; Chemicon), BrdU (proliferating cells), BiP (UPR), 
ATF6 (UPR) or p-S6S235/236 (mTOR signalling). Signal visualization was generally obtained 
using fluorophore-labelled secondary antibodies or through a biotin-HRP streptavidin 
mediated reaction. For COL2 immunostaining, sections were pre-digested with 0.025% 
pepsin in 0.2 N HCl for 10 minutes at 37°C, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, treated with 
0.2% Triton X-100 and quenched in 50 mM NH4Cl prior to incubation with the primary 
antibody. Hoechst staining was used to visualize cell nuclei.
Bone histomorphometry—Images were acquired on an Axioplan 2 microscope (Zeiss) 
and histomorphometric analyses were performed using related Axiovision software (Zeiss). 
Data were expressed according to the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 
standardized histomorphometry nomenclature50.
In situ hybridization
Plasmids containing cDNA fragments used as probes for Col2 (F. Luyten, KU Leuven), 
Col10 (H.M. Kronenberg, Harvard Medical School), Ihh (U.I. Chung, Massachusetts 
General Hospital) and Pthrp (U.I. Chung) were generously provided. After linearization of 
the plasmid downstream of the inserted cDNA fragment, sense and antisense riboprobes 
were obtained by in vitro transcription with T7 TNA polymerase according to the 
manufacturer’s instructions. 35S-labeled riboprobes were generated according to Wilkinson 
et al. The probes were subjected to limited alkaline hydrolysis to obtain fragments of an 
average length of 350 nucleotides.
Radioactive in situ hybridization was carried out on paraformaldehyde-fixed paraffin 
sections using the protocol described by Wilkinson et al. with minor modifications. The 
paraffin sections were de-waxed, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, treated with 20 μg/ml 
proteinase K, fixed again, incubated in 0.1% NaBH4 in PBS and acetylated in a solution of 
0.1 M triethanolamine with 2.5 μg/ml acetic anhydride. The sections were hybridized 
overnight at 55°C with 35S-labeled denatured probes at a final activity of 105 cpm/μl, 
followed by a high stringency wash at 62°C. After several washes, the sections were treated 
with 20 μg/ml ribonuclease A at 37°C for 30 minutes. Finally, the sections were dehydrated, 
air-dried and coated with autoradiography emulsion type NTB (Kodak) diluted 1:1 with 2% 
glycerol for autoradiography. The exposure time (at 4°C in a light-safe box) varied from one 
to several days depending on the probe. Bright field and dark field images were taken on an 
Axioplan 2 microscope (Zeiss) and were superimposed and pseudo-coloured with Adobe 
Photoshop.
Statistics
Data are presented as means ± SEM or means ± SD. n values represent the number of 
independent experiments performed or the number of individual mice phenotyped. For each 
independent in vitro experiment, at least three technical replicates were used. For 
immunoblots, representative images were shown of at least three independent experiments 
using samples from different mice/cell lysates. No statistical methods were used to pre-
Stegen et al. Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 16 ===
determine sample size for in vitro experiments. For in vivo experiments, sample size was 
based on results from previous studies. Data were analysed by two-sided two-sample 
Student’s t-test, and one-way ANOV A with Tukey-Kramer post-hoc test using the NCSS 
statistical software. Differences were considered statistically significant at p<0.05.
Extended Data
Stegen et al. Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 17 ===
Extended Data Figure 1. Phenotype of Phd2chon- mice
(a) Southern blot analysis showing efficient and selective recombination (black arrowhead) 
of the Phd2 gene in neonatal (P2.5) growth plate tissue from Phd2chon- mice. Representative 
images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (b) Phd1, Phd2 and Phd3 mRNA levels in 
neonatal growth plates (n= independent samples from 11 Phd2chon+ and 10 Phd2chon- mice). 
(c-d) Immunoblot of PHD2 and β-actin (c), and of HIF-1α, HIF-2α and Lamin A/C (d) 
levels in growth plate tissue (c) and cultured chondrocytes (d). Representative images of 4 
independent experiments are shown. (e) Quantification of tibia length (n=11 Phd2chon+ − 8 
Stegen et al. Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 18 ===
Phd2chon- mice), body weight (n=11 Phd2chon+ − 8 Phd2chon- mice), lean body mass (n=4 
mice) and fat mass (n=4 mice) of adult (14-week-old) mice. (f) Growth-related phenotype in 
adult Phd2chon- mice. (g) Sox9, Col2, Col10, Pthrp, Ihh, Mmp9, Mmp13 and Opn mRNA 
levels in neonatal growth plates (n= independent samples from 11 Phd2chon+ and 10 
Phd2chon- mice). (h) In situ hybridization for Col2, Col10, Pthrp and Ihh on neonatal growth 
plates (n=4 biologically independent samples; scale bar is 250 μm). (i) Quantification of 
trabecular number (Tb.N; for P2.5, n=10 mice, for 14 weeks, n=11 Phd2chon+ − 8 Phd2chon- 
mice) and thickness (Tb.Th; for P2.5, n=10 mice, for 14 weeks, n=11 Phd2chon+ − 8 
Phd2chon- mice), cortical thickness (Ct.Th; for P2.5, n=10 mice, for 14 weeks, n=11 
Phd2chon+ − 8 Phd2chon- mice), calvarial thickness (calv.Th; n=4 mice) and porosity 
(calv.Po; n=4 mice) in neonatal and adult mice. Nd is not determined. (j) Quantification of 
osteoblast number (N.Ob/B.S; n=4 Phd2chon+ − 5 Phd2chon- mice), osteoblast surface (Ob.S/
B.S; n=4 Phd2chon+ − 5 Phd2chon- mice) and osteoid surface per bone surface (O.S/B.S; n=6 
mice), bone formation rate (BFR; n=4 mice), mineral apposition rate (MAR; n=4 mice), 
osteoclast surface per bone surface (Oc.S/B.S; n=11 Phd2chon+ − 7 Phd2chon- mice), blood 
vessel number per tissue surface (N.BV/T.S; ; n=9 Phd2chon+ − 6 Phd2chon- mice), and 
serum osteocalcin (OCN; n=16 biologically independent samples), CTx-I (n=8 biologically 
independent samples) and CTx-II levels (n=9 biologically independent samples) in adult 
mice. (k-l) Representative images of TRAP-positive multinuclear cells formed after one 
week of culture (k) with quantification (l) of the number of osteoclasts formed per well (n=4 
biologically independent samples; scale bar is 50 μm). Quantification was based on the 
number of nuclei per osteoclast. (m) Type I collagen (COL1) and COL2 immunostaining of 
the metaphysis of neonatal mice (n=8 mice). Scale bar is 100 μm. (n) Quantification of the 
cell/extracellular matrix (ECM) ratio in two zones of the growth plate (n=8 mice). Data are 
means ± SEM in (c, d, l), or means ± SD in (b, e, g, i, j, n). *p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+, 
**p<0.01 vs. Phd2chon+, ***p<0.001 vs. Phd2chon+ (two-sided Student’s t-test). Exact p 
values: 0.000000001 (Phd2; b), 0.00000002 (Phd3; b), 0.00003 (c), 0.0014 (HIF-1α; d), 
0.00005 (tibia length; e), 0.019 (body weight; e), 0.00003 (Tb.N P2.5; i), 0.003 (Tb.N 14 
weeks; i), 0.006 (Tb.Th P2.5; i), 0.037 (Tb.Th 14 weeks; i) or 0.02 (Serum CTx-II; j).
Stegen et al. Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 19 ===
Extended Data Figure 2. Metabolic alterations in PHD2-deficient chondrocytes
(a) Rhodamine labelling of mitochondria, with quantification of mitochondrial content (n= 
samples from 3 Phd2chon+ and 4 Phd2chon- mice). Yellow line denotes cell membrane. (b-c) 
Immunoblot of C-MYC (b), LC3-II (c) and β-actin levels in cultured chondrocytes. 
Representative images of 4 independent experiments are shown. (d) Oxygen consumption in 
cultured chondrocytes (n=9 biologically independent samples). (e) Pimonidazole 
immunostaining on neonatal (P2.5) growth plates, with a higher magnification of the boxed 
area and quantification of pimonidazole-positive cells within the growth plate (n=4 mice). (f) 
Stegen et al. Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 20 ===
Glucose oxidation (GO), fatty acid oxidation (FAO) and glutamine oxidation (QO) in 
cultured chondrocytes (n=6 biologically independent samples). (g) Glucose (Glc) uptake and 
lactate (Lac) secretion (n=6 biologically independent samples). (h) Glycolytic flux (n=6 
biologically independent samples). (i) Fractional contribution of 13C6- Glc to Lac, citrate 
(Cit), α-ketoglutarate (αKG), succinate (Suc), fumarate (Fum) and malate (Mal) (n=6 
biologically independent samples). (j-l) ATP content (j), energy charge ([ATP] + ½ [ADP] / 
[ATP] + [ADP] + [AMP]; k), and energy status (ratio of ATP to AMP levels; l) (n=6 
biologically independent samples). (m) Apoptosis rate of cultured chondrocytes (n=4 
independent experiments). (n) TUNEL immunostaining of neonatal growth plates (n=6 
mice). (o) ATP production resulting from glycolysis, GO, FAO and QO in cultured 
chondrocytes (n=6 biologically independent samples. (p) Proliferation rate of cultured 
chondrocytes (n=4 independent experiments). (q) Immunoblot of Na+/K+ ATPase and β-
actin levels. Representative images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (r) Normalized 
Ca2+-rise in the cytosol of cultured chondrocytes upon stimulation with thapsigargin (TG) in 
the presence of EGTA (n=4 biologically independent samples). (s) Quantification of the 
Ca2+ release from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) upon stimulation with TG (n=4 
biologically independent samples). (t) 45Ca2+ loading capacity of the ER of permeabilised 
chondrocytes in intracellular-like medium supplemented with 5 mM Mg/ATP and 45Ca2+ 
(n=4 biologically independent samples). (u-v) Total protein (u) and proteoglycan synthesis 
(v) (n=8 biologically independent samples). Data are means ± SEM in (a-d, f-m, o-v), or 
means ± SD in (e, n). *p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+, **p<0.01 vs. Phd2chon+, ***p<0.001 vs. 
Phd2chon+ (two-sided Student’s t-test), §p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+-veh (ANOV A). Exact p 
values: 0.03 (a); 0.016 (b); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon--veh 0.0004 (c); Phd2chon+-veh vs. 
Phd2chon--chloroquine 0.0002 (c); 0.000002 (d); 0.0005 (e); 0.00003 (GO; f); 0.000004 
(FAO; f); 0.00001 (Glc; g); 0.000001 (Lac; g); 0.0007 (h); 0.00002 (Lac; i); 0.000002 (Cit; 
i); 0.000001 (αKG; i); 0.00009 (Suc; i); 0.011 (Fum; i); 0.004 (Mal; i); 0.000001 (j); 
0.00005 (k); 0.00000001 (l); 0.0007 (p); 0.012 (q); 0.0003 (s); 0.0002 (u); 0.003 (v). Scale 
bar in (a) is 10 μm, and scale bars in (e, n) are 250 μm.
Stegen et al. Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 21 ===
Extended Data Figure 3. HIF-1α silencing in PHD2-deficient chondrocytes
(a) Expression of indicated genes in cultured chondrocytes, transduced with scrambled 
shRNA (shScr; -) or shRNA against HIF-1α (shHIF-1α) (n=3 biologically independent 
samples). (b) HIF-1α and Lamin A/C immunoblot of cultured chondrocytes, transduced 
with shScr or shHIF-1α. Representative images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (c-
f) Oxygen consumption (c), glycolytic flux (d), energy charge (e) and energy status (f) of 
cultured chondrocytes, transduced with shScr or shHIF-1α (n=6 biologically independent 
samples). (g) P-AMPKT172 and AMPK immunoblot with quantification of p-AMPKT172 to 
AMPK ratio in cultured chondrocytes, transduced with shScr or shHIF-1α. Representative 
images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (h-i) Proliferation (h) and collagen 
synthesis (i) in cultured chondrocytes, transduced with shScr or shHIF-1α (n=6 biologically 
independent samples). (j-k) BiP (j), cleaved (c)ATF6 (k) and β-actin immunoblot of 
cultured chondrocytes, transduced with shScr or shHIF-1α. Representative images of 3 
independent experiments are shown. (l-m) Hydroxyproline (OH-Pro) (l; n=6 biologically 
Stegen et al. Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 22 ===
independent samples) and α-ketoglutarate (αKG) levels (m; n=5 biologically independent 
samples) in cultured chondrocytes, transduced with shScr or shHIF-1α. Data are means ± 
SEM. #p<0.05 (ANOV A), §p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+-shScr, °p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon--shScr 
(ANOV A). Exact p values: Phd2chon+-shScr vs. Phd2chon+-shHIF-1α 0.0003 (b) or 0.002 
(c); Phd2chon+-shScr vs. Phd2chon--shScr 0.050 (b), 0.0000002 (c), 0.00003 (d), 0.004 (e), 
0.000002 (f), 0.050 (g), 0.00002 (h), 0.00005 (i), 0.004 (j), 0.03 (k), 0.00012 (l) or 0.00005 
(m); Phd2chon--shScr vs. Phd2chon--shHIF-1α 0.045 (b), 0.00010 (c), 0.00011 (d), 0.0010 
(e), 0.000012 (f), 0.03 (g), 0.00005 (h), 0.00010 (i), 0.004 (j), 0.006 (k), 0.00001 (l) or 
0.0008 (m).
Stegen et al. Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 23 ===
Extended Data Figure 4. mTOR signalling and the unfolded protein response in PHD2-deficient 
chondrocytes
(a) Immunoblot and quantification of phosphorylated (at Serine 2448) mTOR (p-
mTORS2448), mTOR, phosphorylated (at Threonine 389 and Serine 371) p70 S6 kinase (p-
p70 S6KT389 and p-p70 S6KS371), p70 S6K, phosphorylated (at Serine 235 and 236) S6 (p-
S6S235/236) and S6, phosphorylated (at Threonine 37 and 46) 4E-BP1 (p-4E-BP1T37/46), 4E-
BP1 and β-actin in cultured chondrocytes. Representative images of 3 independent 
experiments are shown. (b-c) p-S6S235/236 immunostaining on neonatal (P2.5) growth plates 
Stegen et al. Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 24 ===
(b), with a higher magnification of the boxed area and quantification (c) of the p-S6+ area 
(n=6 mice). GP is growth plate, PS is primary spongiosa. (d) Immunoblot of p-S6S235/236 
and S6 in cultured chondrocytes. Cells were either cultured in full medium or in nutrient-
deprived conditions (PBS), and then switched to full medium for indicated times. 
Representative images of 3 independent experiments are shown. These data show the 
absence of enhanced mTOR signalling. (e) Immunoblot and quantification of BiP, 
(p-)eIF2α, ATF4 and cleaved (c)ATF6 protein levels. Representative images of 3 
independent experiments are shown. (f) Spliced Xbp-1 (Xbp-1s) mRNA levels in neonatal 
growth plates (n=8 biologically independent samples). (g-h) BiP and cATF6 
immunostaining (g) of neonatal growth plates with quantification (h) of the percentage of 
positive cells (n=6 mice). Data are means ± SEM in (a, d, e), or means ± SD in (c, f, h). 
*p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+, **p<0.01 vs. Phd2chon+, ***p<0.001 vs. Phd2chon+ (two-sided 
Student’s t-test), §p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+-full medium, °p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+-full medium 0.5 
h (ANOV A). Exact p values: Phd2chon+-full vs. Phd2chon+-PBS 0.003 (d); Phd2chon+-full vs. 
Phd2chon--PBS 0.005 (d), Phd2chon+-full vs. Phd2chon−−0.5 h 0.03 (d); Phd2chon+−0.5 h vs. 
Phd2chon−−0.5 h 0.04 (d); 0.04 (BiP; e); 0.02 (p-eIF2a; e); 0.0005 (ATF4; e); 0.02 (cATF6; 
e); 0.002 (f); 0.00005 (BiP; h); 0.000009 (cATF6; h). Scale bars are 250 μm.
Stegen et al. Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 25 ===
Extended Data Figure 5. PHD2 controls type II collagen (COL2) modifications
(a) COL2 protein levels in neonatal (P2.5) growth plates, visualized by COL2 Western Blot. 
Protein loading was normalized to growth plate weight. Representative images of 2 
experiments, each with 2 biologically independent replicates, are shown. (b) COL2 
immunostaining of extracellular matrix produced by cultured chondrocytes and after 
removal of cells, with quantification of the COL2 positive area (n=4 mice). (c) Amide I peak 
(area under the curve, AUC), representing collagen, from FT-IR spectra of neonatal growth 
plates (n= samples from 8 Phd2chon+ and 6 Phd2chon- mice). (d) Transmission electron 
microscopy images of the collagen network in neonatal growth plates (n=3 mice). (e) 
Stegen et al. Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 26 ===
Increase in hydroxylation and/or glycosylation (as %) of proline (Pro) and lysine (Lys) 
residues in type II collagen of Phd2chon- mice compared to Phd2chon+ mice (n=4 biologically 
independent samples). Glcgal is glucosyl-galactosyl. (f) Total, intracellular and extracellular 
hydroxyproline (OH-Pro) content of cultured chondrocytes (n=4 biologically independent 
samples). (g) V on Kossa staining of neonatal growth plates, with quantification of the 
percentage mineralized matrix (n=8 mice, boxed areas are enlarged). (h-i) Micromass 
mineralization, as evidenced by Alizarin Red (AR) staining (h), with quantification of AR 
intensity (i) (n=5 biologically independent samples) showing that increased matrix 
mineralization is not caused by HIF-1α-induced changes in mineralization capacity. (j) 
Expression of genes involved in mineralization (Ank, Tnap, Enpp1 and Spp1) is not changed 
in neonatal growth plates (n=6 biologically independent samples). (k) Phd2 mRNA levels in 
cultured periosteum-derived cells (PDC), calvarial osteoblasts (calv. OB) and trabecular 
(trab.) OB (n=4 biologically independent samples). (l) Change in hydroxylation and/or 
glycosylation (as %) of proline (OH-Pro) and lysine (OH-Lys) residues in type I collagen of 
Phd2chon- mice compared to Phd2chon+ mice (n=4 biologically independent samples). (m) 
OH-Pro levels in cultured PDC, and calvarial and trabecular osteoblasts (n=4 biologically 
independent samples). (n) OH-Pro content in bone tissue and supernatant, after incubation 
with MMP9 or MMP13 (n=4 biologically independent samples). (o) Fractional contribution 
of 13C5-glutamine (Gln) to proline (n=3 biologically independent samples). (p) Intracellular 
proline levels in cultured Phd2chon+ and Phd2chon- chondrocytes (n=3 biologically 
independent samples). Data are means ± SD in (a, c, g, j), or means ± SEM in (b, f, i, k-p). 
*p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+, **p<0.01 vs. Phd2chon+, ***p<0.001 vs. Phd2chon+ (two-sided 
Student’s t-test), #p<0.05 (ANOV A). Exact p values: 0.0003 (a); 0.02 (b); 0.006 (c); 0.0018 
(Pro459; e); 0.008 (Pro744; e); 0.014 (Pro795; e); 0.015 (Pro826; e); 0.016 (Pro945; e); 
0.00015 (Pro966; e); 0.008 (Pro986; e); 0.019 (Lys87; e); 0.002 (total; f); 0.0014 (extra; f); 
0.012 (g); vehicle vs. Phd2chon+ 0.0002 (i); IOX2 vs. Phd2chon- 0.0001 (i); Phd2chon+ vs. 
Phd2chon- 0.004 (i); 0.015 (Pro1011; l); 0.012 (Lys174; l). Scale bar in (b) is 50 μm, 0.5 μm 
in (d), and 100 μm in (g).
Stegen et al. Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 27 ===
Extended Data Figure 6. Genetic confirmation of HIF-1α signalling and metabolic adaptations
(a-c) Immunoblot of HIF-1α (a), GLS1 (b), PDK1 (c), Lamin A/C and β-actin in cultured 
control or PHD2-deficient (PHD2KD) periosteal cells, transduced with scrambled shRNA 
(shScr; -) or gene-specific shRNAs. Representative images of 3 independent experiments are 
shown. (d) Toluidine Blue staining of bone ossicles (n=5 biologically independent samples). 
Arrowheads indicate cartilage remnants (scale bar is 100 μm). (e) 3D CT models of bone 
ossicles, with quantification of the mineralized tissue volume (MV/TV) (n=5 biologically 
independent samples). (f-g) Immunoblot of GLS1 (f), PDK1 (g), and β-actin in cultured 
chondrocytes, transduced with shScr or gene-specific shRNAs. Representative images of 3 
Stegen et al. Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 28 ===
independent experiments are shown. (h) P-AMPKT172 and AMPK immunoblot with 
quantification of p-AMPKT172 to AMPK ratio in cultured chondrocytes, transduced with 
shScr or gene-specific shRNAs. Representative images of 3 independent experiments are 
shown. (i-k) Proliferation (i), α-ketoglutarate (αKG) levels (j) and hydroxyproline (OH-Pro) 
content (k) in cultured chondrocytes, transduced with shScr or gene-specific shRNAs (n=5 
biologically independent samples). Data are means ± SEM in (a-c, f-k), or means ± SD in 
(e). #p<0.05 (ANOV A), §p<0.05 vs. control/Phd2chon+-shScr, °p<0.05 vs. PHD2KD/
Phd2chon--shScr (ANOV A). Exact p values: control-shScr vs. control-gene specific shRNA 
0.0005 (a), 0.0003 (b), 0.010 (c), 0.0004 (shHIF-1α; e) or 0.00012 (shGLS1; e); control-
shScr vs. PHD2KD-shScr 0.02 (a), 0.04 (b), 0.046 (c) or 0.003 (e); PHD2KD-shScr vs. 
PHD2KD-gene specific shRNA 0.03 (a), 0.03 (b), 0.03 (c), 0.002 (shHIF-1α; e), 0.0005 
(shGLS1; e), 0.049 (shPDK1; e); Phd2chon+-shScr vs. Phd2chon+-gene specific shRNA 
0.000010 (shGLS1; f), 0.006 (shPDK1; g), 0.00011 (shGLS1; i), 0.002 (shGLS1;j) or 
0.0006 (shGLS1; k); Phd2chon+-shScr vs. Phd2chon--shScr 0.0020 (f), 0.00010 (g), 0.006 (h), 
0.00012 (i), 0.00011 (j) or 0.0002 (k); Phd2chon--shScr vs. Phd2chon--gene specific shRNA 
0.005 (shGLS1; f), 0.00015 (shPDK1; g), 0.003 (shPDK1; h), 0.0002 (shPDK1; i), 0.00008 
(shGLS1; j), 0.00010 (shGLS1; k) or 0.0006 (shPDK1; k); Phd2chon+-shScr vs. Phd2chon--
gene specific shRNA 0.002 (shGLS1; h).
Stegen et al. Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 29 ===
Extended Data Figure 7. PHD2-deficient chondrocytes display enhanced glutamine metabolism
(a) Intracellular glutamate (Glu), α-ketoglutarate (αKG), succinate (Suc), fumarate (Fum), 
malate (Mal) and citrate (Cit) levels in cultured chondrocytes, with or without BPTES 
treatment (n=3 biologically independent samples). (b) Ratio of αKG/Suc and αKG/Fum 
(n=3 biologically independent samples). (c) GLS1 and β-actin immunoblot of cultured 
chondrocytes transduced with scrambled shRNA (shScr; -) or shRNA against HIF-1α 
(shHIF-1α). Representative images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (d) 
Immunoblot of GLS1, GLS2 and β-actin in cultured chondrocytes, compared to HeLa cells. 
Stegen et al. Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 30 ===
Representative images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (e) Fractional contribution 
of 13C5-glutamine (Gln) to Glu, αKG, Suc, Fum, Mal and Cit in cultured chondrocytes, with 
or without BPTES treatment (n=3 biologically independent samples). (f) Citrate mass 
isotopomer distribution (MID) from 13C5-Gln (n=3 biologically independent samples). (g) 
Relative abundance of reductive carboxylation-specific mass isotopomers of Cit, Mal and 
Fum (n=3 biologically independent samples). (h) Type II collagen (COL2) immunostaining 
of the tibia of neonatal (P2.5) mice treated with BPTES and/or αKG with quantification of 
the percentage COL2-positive matrix (green) relative to bone volume (BV) (n=5 for 
Phd2chon+-veh or Phd2chon--veh mice; and n=7 for Phd2chon+-BPTES, Phd2chon+-BPTES
+αKG, Phd2chon--BPTES or Phd2chon--BPTES+αKG mice). Scale bar is 250 μm, GP is 
growth plate, PS is primary spongiosa, arrowheads indicate COL2 cartilage remnants. (i) 3D 
microCT models of the tibial metaphysis of mice treated with BPTES, with or without αKG, 
and quantification of trabecular bone volume (TBV) (n=6 for Phd2chon+-veh, Phd2chon+-
BPTES+αKG or Phd2chon--veh mice; n=5 for Phd2chon+-BPTES mice; and n=7 for 
Phd2chon--BPTES or Phd2chon--BPTES+αKG mice). (j) Immunoblot of HIF-1α and Lamin 
A/C in cultured chondrocytes treated with BPTES, with or without αKG. Representative 
images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (k) Relative mRNA levels of indicated 
genes in growth plates derived from mice treated with BPTES, with or without αKG (n=3 
biologically independent samples). (l) Immunoblot of p-AMPKT172 and AMPK in cultured 
chondrocytes treated with BPTES, with or without αKG. Representative images of 3 
independent experiments are shown. (m) Proliferation, as determined by BrdU 
incorporation, of cultured chondrocytes, treated with BPTES, with or without αKG (n=3 
biologically independent samples). (n) Tibia length of mice treated with BPTES, with or 
without αKG (n=5 for Phd2chon+-veh or Phd2chon--veh mice; and n=7 for Phd2chon+-
BPTES, Phd2chon+-BPTES+αKG, Phd2chon--BPTES or Phd2chon--BPTES+αKG mice). (o) 
BiP, cleaved (c)ATF6 and β-actin immunoblot in cultured chondrocytes treated with BPTES, 
with or without αKG. Representative images of 3 independent experiments are shown. Data 
are means ± SEM in (a-g, j, l, m, o), or means ± SD in (h, i, k, n). *p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+, 
**p<0.01 vs. Phd2chon+, ***p<0.001 vs. Phd2chon+ (two-sided Student’s t-test), #p<0.05 
(ANOV A), §p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+-shScr/veh, °p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon--shScr/veh (ANOV A). 
Exact p values: Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon--veh 0.045 (αKG/Suc; b), 0.010 (αKG/Fum; b), 
0.00008 (Glu; e), 0.00004 (αKG; e), 0.02 (Suc; e), 0.0007 (Fum; e), 0.009 (Mal; e), 0.050 
(Cit; e), 0.00001 (h), 0.00003 (i), 0.03 (j), 0.0001 (P4ha1; k), 0.0006 (P4ha2; k), 0.00002 
(P3h1; k), 0.0001 (Plod1; k), 0.0002 (Plod2; k), 0.0003 (Pdi; k), 0.0004 (Lox; k), 0.004 (l), 
0.006 (m), 0.000002 (n), 0.0005 (BiP; o) or 0.002 (cATF6; o); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon+-
BPTES 0.00001 (Glu; e), 0.000003 (αKG; e), 0.02 (Suc; e), 0.0006 (Fum; e), 0.00005 (Mal; 
e), 0.02 (Cit; e), 0.00001 (h), 0.0001 (i), 0.002 (m) or 0.0000001 (n); Phd2chon+-BPTES vs. 
Phd2chon+-BPTES+αKG 0.004 (m) or 0.0003 (n); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon--BPTES 0.03 
(αKG/Fum; b), 0.005 (j), 0.0003 (P4ha1; k), 0.001 (P4ha2; k), 0.0006 (P3h1; k), 0.0001 
(Plod1; k), 0.0006 (Plod2; k), 0.002 (Pdi; k), 0.0006 (Lox; k), 0.012 (l), 0.007 (m), 
0.000007 (n), 0.003 (BiP; o) or 0.004 (cATF6; o); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon--BPTES
+αKG 0.00006 (h), 0.00002 (i), 0.03 (j), 0.0003 (P4ha1; k), 0.001 (P4ha2; k), 0.0001 
(P3h1; k), 0.00008 (Plod1; k), 0.0007 (Plod2; k), 0.00003 (Pdi; k), 0.0003 (Lox; k), 0.04 (l), 
0.019 (m), 0.000005 (n), 0.02 (BiP; o) or 0.0010 (cATF6; o); Phd2chon--veh vs. Phd2chon--
BPTES 0.025 (αKG/Suc; b), 0.049 (αKG/Fum; b), 0.00001 (Glu; e), 0.00001 (αKG; e), 
Stegen et al. Page 30
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 31 ===
0.02 (Suc; e), 0.006 (Fum; e), 0.002 (Mal; e), 0.02 (Cit; e), 0.000002 (h) or 0.000005 (i); 
Phd2chon+-shScr vs. Phd2chon--shScr 0.007 (c); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon+-shHIF-1α 
0.006 (c); Phd2chon--veh vs. Phd2chon--shHIF-1α 0.013 (c); Phd2chon+ vs. Phd2chon- 0.007 
(GLS1; d), 0.0013 (m+4; f), 0.0006 (m+5; f), 0.0006 (Cit; g), 0.0002 (Mal; g) or 0.048 
(Fum; g); Phd2chon+ vs. HeLa 0.04 (GLS1; d) or 0.0088 (GLS2; d).
Stegen et al. Page 31
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 32 ===
Extended Data Figure 8. Inhibition of pyruvate uptake does not affect collagen or bone 
properties
(a) Intracellular α-ketoglutarate (αKG) levels in cultured chondrocytes, with or without 
treatment with an inhibitor of monocarboxylate transporter 2 (MCT2i) (n=3 biologically 
independent samples). (b) P-AMPKT172 and AMPK immunoblot with quantification of p-
AMPKT172 to AMPK ratio in cultured chondrocytes treated with MCT2i. Representative 
images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (c) Tibia length of mice treated with 
MCT2i (n=5 mice). (d) Collagen synthesis in cultured chondrocytes, with or without MCT2i 
treatment (n=4 biologically independent samples). (e) BiP, cleaved (c)ATF6 and β-actin 
immunoblot in cultured chondrocytes treated with MCT2i. Representative images of 3 
independent experiments are shown. (f) Hydroxyproline (OH-Pro) content in neonatal 
growth plates of mice treated with MCT2i (n=5 biologically independent samples). (g) 
Safranin O staining of the tibia of mice treated with MCT2i, and quantification of the 
percentage Safranin O (SafO) positive matrix relative to bone volume (BV) (n=5 mice). (h) 
Type II collagen (COL2) immunostaining of the tibia of mice treated with MCT2i, with 
quantification of the percentage COL2-positive matrix (green) relative to bone volume (n=5 
mice). GP is growth plate, PS is primary spongiosa, arrowheads indicate COL2 cartilage 
remnants. (i) 3D microCT models of the tibial metaphysis of mice treated with MCT2i, and 
quantification of trabecular bone volume (TBV) (n=5 mice). Data are means ± SEM in (a-b, 
Stegen et al. Page 32
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 33 ===
d-e), or means ± SD in (c, f-i). #p<0.05 (ANOV A), §p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+-veh (ANOV A). 
Exact p values: Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon--veh 0.00002 (a), 0.015 (b), 0.00001 (c), 
0.00011 (d), 0.012 (BiP; e), 0.008 (cATF6; e), 0.00012 (f), 0.00013 (g), 0.00001 (h) or 
0.00001 (i); Phd2chon+-MCT2i vs. Phd2chon--MCT2i 0.0003 (a), 0.000002 (c), 0.005 (d) or 
0.0003 (f); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon--MCT2i 0.02 (b), 0.004 (BiP; e), 0.002 (cATF6; e), 
0.00007 (g), 0.0001 (h) or 0.00002 (i). Scale bars in (g) and (h) are 250 μm.
Stegen et al. Page 33
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 34 ===
Extended Data Figure 9. Administration of α-ketoglutarate increases collagen hydroxylation and 
bone mass in wild-type mice
(a) Intracellular α-ketoglutarate (αKG) levels in cultured chondrocytes, with or without 
supplementation of dimethyl-αKG (hereafter αKG) (n=4 biologically independent samples). 
(b) P-AMPKT172 and AMPK immunoblot with quantification of p-AMPKT172 to AMPK 
ratio in cultured chondrocytes, with or without αKG supplementation. Representative 
images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (c) Tibia length of mice treated with αKG 
(n=5 mice). (d) Collagen synthesis in cultured chondrocytes, with or without αKG 
supplementation (n=4 biologically independent samples). (e) Immunoblot of BiP, cleaved 
(c)ATF6 and β-actin in cultured chondrocytes, with or without αKG supplementation. 
Representative images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (f) Hydroxyproline (OH-
Pro) content in neonatal growth plates of mice treated with αKG (n=5 biologically 
independent samples). (g) Safranin O staining of the tibia of mice treated with αKG, and 
Stegen et al. Page 34
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 35 ===
quantification of the percentage Safranin O (SafO) positive matrix relative to bone volume 
(BV) (n=5 mice). (h) Type II collagen (COL2) immunostaining of the tibia of mice treated 
with αKG, with quantification of the percentage COL2-positive matrix (green) relative to 
bone volume (n=5 mice). GP is growth plate, PS is primary spongiosa, arrowheads indicate 
COL2 cartilage remnants. (i) 3D microCT models of the tibial metaphysis of mice treated 
with αKG, and quantification of trabecular bone volume (TBV) (n=5 mice). (j) Immunoblot 
of HIF-1α and Lamin A/C in cultured chondrocytes, with or without αKG supplementation. 
Representative images of 3 independent experiments are shown. (k) Relative mRNA levels 
of indicated genes in growth plates derived from mice treated with αKG (n=3 biologically 
independent samples). Data are means ± SEM in (a-b, d-e, j), or means ± SD in (c, f-i, k). 
#p<0.05 (ANOV A), §p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+-veh (ANOV A). Exact p values: Phd2chon+-veh vs. 
Phd2chon--veh 0.000001 (a), 0.04 (b), 0.00000001 (c), 0.002 (d), 0.046 (BiP; e), 0.011 
(cATF6; e), 0.0003 (f), 0.0002 (g), 0.000004 (h), 0.00002 (i), 0.03 (j), 0.00008 (P4ha1; k), 
0.0007 (P4ha2; k), 0.0003 (P3h1; k), 0.004 (Plod1; k), 0.0005 (Plod2; k), 0.0005 (Pdi; k) or 
0.002 (Lox; k); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon+-αKG 0.000007 (a), 0.02 (f), 0.006 (g), 0.00002 
(h) or 0.0003 (i); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon--αKG 0.02 (b), 0.008 (BiP; e), 0.02 (cATF6; 
e), 0.005 (f), 0.0003 (g), 0.000002 (h), 0.000003 (i), 0.010 (j), 0.0010 (P4ha1; k), 0.002 
(P4ha2; k), 0.0011 (P3h1; k), 0.02 (Plod1; k), 0.00001 (Plod2; k), 0.007 (Pdi; k) or 0.004 
(Lox; k); Phd2chon+-αKG vs. Phd2chon--αKG 0.0002 (a), 0.00000007 (c) or 0.002 (d); 
Phd2chon--veh vs. Phd2chon--αKG 0.003 (a). Scale bars in (g) and (h) are 250 μm.
Stegen et al. Page 35
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 36 ===
Extended Data Figure 10. Normalization of glucose oxidation corrects the energy deficit in 
PHD2-deficient chondrocytes
(a-e) Glucose oxidation (a), oxygen consumption (b), palmitate oxidation (c), glutamine 
oxidation (d) and glycolytic flux (e) in cultured chondrocytes, with or without DCA 
treatment (n=6 biologically independent samples for a, n=3 biologically independent 
samples for b-e). (f) Proliferation, as determined by BrdU incorporation, of cultured 
chondrocytes, with or without DCA treatment (n=3 biologically independent samples). (g) 
Tibia length of mice treated with DCA (n=5 Phd2chon+-veh, Phd2chon--veh or Phd2chon--
Stegen et al. Page 36
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 37 ===
DCA mice - n=7 Phd2chon+-DCA). (h-i) BiP (h), cleaved (c)ATF6 (i) and β-actin 
immunoblot in cultured DCA-treated chondrocytes. Representative images of 3 independent 
experiments are shown. (j) Hydroxyproline (OH-Pro) content in neonatal growth plates of 
mice treated with DCA, with or without BPTES (n=5 from Phd2chon+-veh or Phd2chon--veh 
mice - n=7 from Phd2chon+-DCA, Phd2chon+-DCA+BPTES, Phd2chon--DCA or Phd2chon--
DCA+BPTES mice). (k) Type II collagen (COL2) immunostaining of the tibia of mice 
treated with DCA, with or without BPTES with quantification of the percentage COL2-
positive matrix (green) relative to bone volume (BV) (n=5 from Phd2chon+-veh mice - n=7 
from Phd2chon--veh, Phd2chon+-DCA, Phd2chon+-DCA+BPTES, Phd2chon--DCA or 
Phd2chon--DCA+BPTES mice). Scale bar is 250 μm, GP is growth plate, PS is primary 
spongiosa, arrowheads indicate COL2 cartilage remnants. (l) 3D microCT models of the 
tibial metaphysis of mice treated with DCA, with or without BPTES, and quantification of 
trabecular bone volume (TBV) (n=5 from Phd2chon+-veh or Phd2chon--veh mice - n=7 from 
Phd2chon+-DCA, Phd2chon+-DCA+BPTES, Phd2chon--DCA or Phd2chon--DCA+BPTES 
mice). (m) Intracellular α-ketoglutarate (αKG) levels in cultured chondrocytes treated with 
DCA, with or without BPTES (n=4 biologically independent samples). (n) Relative mRNA 
levels of indicated genes in growth plates derived from mice treated with DCA, with or 
without BPTES (n=3 biologically independent samples). Data are means ± SEM in (a-f, h-i, 
m), or means ± SD in (g, j-l, n). #p<0.05 (ANOV A), §p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+-veh, °p<0.05 vs. 
Phd2chon--veh (ANOV A). Exact p values: Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon--veh 0.00002 (a), 
0.0006 (b), 0.0009 (c), 0.0096 (e), 0.003 (f), 0.00006 (g), 0.003 (h), 0.005 (i), 0.0003 (j), 
0.0000004 (k), 0.0002 (l), 0.002 (m), 0.00008 (P4ha1; n), 0.00003 (P4ha2; n), 0.0004 
(P3h1; n), 0.004 (Plod1; n), 0.005 (Plod2; n), 0.0002 (Pdi; n) or 0.002 (Lox; n); Phd2chon+-
veh vs. Phd2chon+-DCA 0.003 (a); Phd2chon--veh vs. Phd2chon--DCA 0.0003 (a), 0.002 (b), 
0.003 (e), 0.02 (f), 0.00012 (g), 0.004 (h), 0.005 (i), 0.000003 (k) or 0.0001 (l); Phd2chon+-
veh vs. Phd2chon--DCA 0.005 (c), 0.000008 (j), 0.0000002 (k), 0.00005 (l), 0.0004 (m), 
0.0002 (P4ha1; n), 0.00003 (P4ha2; n), 0.00001 (P3h1; n), 0.0004 (Plod1; n), 0.001 (Plod2; 
n), 0.001 (Pdi; n) or 0.00008 (Lox; n); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon+-DCA+BPTES 
0.0000002 (j), 0.0003 (k), 0.004 (l) or 0.005 (m); Phd2chon--veh vs. Phd2chon--DCA+BPTES 
0.00002 (j), 0.000000002 (k), 0.000003 (l), 0.0014 (m), 0.0008 (P4ha1; n), 0.0002 (P4ha2; 
n), 0.0001 (P3h1; n), 0.0001 (Plod1; n), 0.001 (Plod2; n), 0.001 (Pdi; n) or 0.0002 (Lox; n).
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank I. Stockmans, K. Moermans, T. Luyten, J.-P. Decuypere, E. Van Herck and I. Jans for 
technical assistance. G.C. acknowledges funding from the Research Foundation-Flanders (FWO: G.0A72.13, 
G.0964.14 and G.0A42.16); P.C. from long-term structural funding – Methusalem Funding by the Flemish 
Government; S.-M.F. from Marie Curie-CIG, FWO-Odysseus II, and FWO-Research Grants/Projects; D.R.E. NIH 
grants AR037318 from NIAMS and HD070394 from NICHD; and G.B. from KU Leuven OnderzoeksToelage. S.S. 
is a postdoctoral fellow from the FWO. G.R. is supported by consecutive PhD fellowships from the Emmanuel van 
der Schueren - Kom op tegen Kanker foundation and FWO. S.L. is supported by a FWO doctoral grant strategic 
basic research. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Stegen et al. Page 37
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 38 ===
Main text references
1. Kronenberg HM Developmental regulation of the growth plate. Nature 423, 332–336, doi:10.1038/
nature01657 (2003). [PubMed: 12748651] 
2. Buttgereit F & Brand MD A hierarchy of ATP-consuming processes in mammalian cells. Biochem J 
312 ( Pt 1), 163–167 (1995). [PubMed: 7492307] 
3. Maes C et al. VEGF-independent cell-autonomous functions of HIF-1alpha regulating oxygen 
consumption in fetal cartilage are critical for chondrocyte survival. J Bone Miner Res 27, 596–609, 
doi:10.1002/jbmr.1487 (2012). [PubMed: 22162090] 
4. Pfander D, Cramer T, Schipani E & Johnson RS HIF-1alpha controls extracellular matrix synthesis 
by epiphyseal chondrocytes. J Cell Sci 116, 1819–1826 (2003). [PubMed: 12665562] 
5. Aro E et al. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) but not HIF-2 is essential for hypoxic induction of 
collagen prolyl 4-hydroxylases in primary newborn mouse epiphyseal growth plate chondrocytes. J 
Biol Chem 287, 37134–37144, doi:10.1074/jbc.M112.352872 (2012). [PubMed: 22930750] 
6. Schipani E et al. Hypoxia in cartilage: HIF-1alpha is essential for chondrocyte growth arrest and 
survival. Genes Dev 15, 2865–2876, doi:10.1101/gad.934301 (2001). [PubMed: 11691837] 
7. Aragones J, Fraisl P, Baes M & Carmeliet P Oxygen sensors at the crossroad of metabolism. Cell 
Metab 9, 11–22, doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2008.10.001 (2009). [PubMed: 19117543] 
8. Nakazawa MS, Keith B & Simon MC Oxygen availability and metabolic adaptations. Nat Rev 
Cancer 16, 663–673, doi:10.1038/nrc.2016.84 (2016). [PubMed: 27658636] 
9. Hochachka PW, Buck LT, Doll CJ & Land SC Unifying theory of hypoxia tolerance: molecular/
metabolic defense and rescue mechanisms for surviving oxygen lack. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93, 
9493–9498 (1996). [PubMed: 8790358] 
10. Wheaton WW & Chandel NS Hypoxia. 2. Hypoxia regulates cellular metabolism. Am J Physiol 
Cell Physiol 300, C385–393, doi:10.1152/ajpcell.00485.2010 (2011). [PubMed: 21123733] 
11. Cheng K et al. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha regulates beta cell function in mouse and human 
islets. J Clin Invest 120, 2171–2183, doi:10.1172/JCI35846 (2010). [PubMed: 20440072] 
12. Myllyharju J & Kivirikko KI Collagens, modifying enzymes and their mutations in humans, flies 
and worms. Trends Genet 20, 33–43, doi:10.1016/j.tig.2003.11.004 (2004). [PubMed: 14698617] 
13. Vater CA, Harris ED Jr. & Siegel RC Native cross-links in collagen fibrils induce resistance to 
human synovial collagenase. Biochem J 181, 639–645 (1979). [PubMed: 42386] 
14. Jarman-Smith ML et al. Porcine collagen crosslinking, degradation and its capability for fibroblast 
adhesion and proliferation. J Mater Sci Mater Med 15, 925–932, doi:10.1023/
B:JMSM.0000036281.47596.cc (2004). [PubMed: 15477745] 
15. Gerstenfeld LC, Riva A, Hodgens K, Eyre DR & Landis WJ Post-translational control of collagen 
fibrillogenesis in mineralizing cultures of chick osteoblasts. J Bone Miner Res 8, 1031–1043, 
doi:10.1002/jbmr.5650080903 (1993). [PubMed: 8237472] 
16. van Gastel N et al. Expansion of murine periosteal progenitor cells with fibroblast growth factor 2 
reveals an intrinsic endochondral ossification program mediated by bone morphogenetic protein 2. 
Stem Cells 32, 2407–2418, doi:10.1002/stem.1783 (2014). [PubMed: 24989687] 
17. Myllyharju J Prolyl 4-hydroxylases, key enzymes in the synthesis of collagens and regulation of 
the response to hypoxia, and their roles as treatment targets. Ann Med 40, 402–417, 
doi:10.1080/07853890801986594 (2008). [PubMed: 19160570] 
18. Lorendeau D, Christen S, Rinaldi G & Fendt SM Metabolic control of signalling pathways and 
metabolic auto-regulation. Biol Cell 107, 251–272, doi:10.1111/boc.201500015 (2015). [PubMed: 
25913226] 
19. Elia I et al. Environmental pyruvate drives extracellular matrix remodelling by breast cancer cells. 
submitted (2017).
20. Altman BJ, Stine ZE & Dang CV From Krebs to clinic: glutamine metabolism to cancer therapy. 
Nat Rev Cancer 16, 619–634, doi:10.1038/nrc.2016.71 (2016). [PubMed: 27492215] 
21. Semenza GL Molecular mechanisms mediating metastasis of hypoxic breast cancer cells. Trends 
Mol Med 18, 534–543, doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2012.08.001 (2012). [PubMed: 22921864] 
Stegen et al. Page 38
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 39 ===
22. Marini JC et al. Osteogenesis imperfecta. Nat Rev Dis Primers 3, 17052, doi:10.1038/nrdp.2017.52 
(2017). [PubMed: 28820180] 
23. Wynn TA & Ramalingam TR Mechanisms of fibrosis: therapeutic translation for fibrotic disease. 
Nat Med 18, 1028–1040, doi:10.1038/nm.2807 (2012). [PubMed: 22772564] 
24. Bonnans C, Chou J & Werb Z Remodelling the extracellular matrix in development and disease. 
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15, 786–801, doi:10.1038/nrm3904 (2014). [PubMed: 25415508] 
Methods references
25. Mazzone M et al. Heterozygous deficiency of PHD2 restores tumor oxygenation and inhibits 
metastasis via endothelial normalization. Cell 136, 839–851, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2009.01.020 
(2009). [PubMed: 19217150] 
26. Ovchinnikov DA, Deng JM, Ogunrinu G & Behringer RR Col2a1-directed expression of Cre 
recombinase in differentiating chondrocytes in transgenic mice. Genesis 26, 145–146 (2000). 
[PubMed: 10686612] 
27. Maes C et al. Soluble VEGF isoforms are essential for establishing epiphyseal vascularization and 
regulating chondrocyte development and survival. J Clin Invest 113, 188–199, doi:10.1172/
JCI19383 (2004). [PubMed: 14722611] 
28. Stegen S et al. Osteocytic oxygen sensing controls bone mass through epigenetic regulation of 
sclerostin. Nat Commun 9, 2557, doi:10.1038/s41467-018-04679-7 (2018). [PubMed: 29967369] 
29. Stegen S et al. HIF-1alpha Promotes Glutamine-Mediated Redox Homeostasis and Glycogen-
Dependent Bioenergetics to Support Postimplantation Bone Cell Survival. Cell Metab 23, 265–
279, doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2016.01.002 (2016). [PubMed: 26863487] 
30. Stegen S et al. Adequate hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha signaling is indispensable for bone 
regeneration. Bone 87, 176–186, doi:10.1016/j.bone.2016.03.014 (2016). [PubMed: 27058876] 
31. Christen S et al. Breast Cancer-Derived Lung Metastases Show Increased Pyruvate Carboxylase-
Dependent Anaplerosis. Cell Rep 17, 837–848, doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2016.09.042 (2016). 
[PubMed: 27732858] 
32. Lorendeau D et al. Dual loss of succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and complex I activity is 
necessary to recapitulate the metabolic phenotype of SDH mutant tumors. Metab Eng 43, 187–
197, doi:10.1016/j.ymben.2016.11.005 (2017). [PubMed: 27847310] 
33. Buescher JM et al. A roadmap for interpreting (13)C metabolite labeling patterns from cells. Curr 
Opin Biotechnol 34, 189–201, doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2015.02.003 (2015). [PubMed: 25731751] 
34. Elia I et al. Proline metabolism supports metastasis formation and could be inhibited to selectively 
target metastasizing cancer cells. Nat Commun 8, 15267, doi:10.1038/ncomms15267 (2017). 
[PubMed: 28492237] 
35. Koopman WJ, Visch HJ, Smeitink JA & Willems PH Simultaneous quantitative measurement and 
automated analysis of mitochondrial morphology, mass, potential, and motility in living human 
skin fibroblasts. Cytometry A 69, 1–12, doi:10.1002/cyto.a.20198 (2006). [PubMed: 16342116] 
36. Sunic D, Belford DA, McNeil JD & Wiebkin OW Insulin-like growth factor binding proteins (IGF-
BPs) in bovine articular and ovine growth-plate chondrocyte cultures: their regulation by IGFs and 
modulation of proteoglycan synthesis. Biochim Biophys Acta 1245, 43–48 (1995). [PubMed: 
7544626] 
37. Carmeliet G, Himpens B & Cassiman JJ Selective increase in the binding of the alpha 1 beta 1 
integrin for collagen type IV during neurite outgrowth of human neuroblastoma TR 14 cells. J Cell 
Sci 107 ( Pt 12), 3379–3392 (1994). [PubMed: 7535784] 
38. Weis MA et al. Location of 3-hydroxyproline residues in collagen types I, II, III, and V/XI implies 
a role in fibril supramolecular assembly. J Biol Chem 285, 2580–2590, doi:10.1074/
jbc.M109.068726 (2010). [PubMed: 19940144] 
39. Creemers LB, Jansen DC, van Veen-Reurings A, van den Bos T & Everts V Microassay for the 
assessment of low levels of hydroxyproline. Biotechniques 22, 656–658 (1997). [PubMed: 
9105617] 
Stegen et al. Page 39
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 40 ===
40. Daci E, Verstuyf A, Moermans K, Bouillon R & Carmeliet G Mice lacking the plasminogen 
activator inhibitor 1 are protected from trabecular bone loss induced by estrogen deficiency. J Bone 
Miner Res 15, 1510–1516, doi:10.1359/jbmr.2000.15.8.1510 (2000). [PubMed: 10934649] 
41. Decuypere JP et al. STIM1, but not STIM2, is required for proper agonist-induced Ca2+ signaling. 
Cell Calcium 48, 161–167, doi:10.1016/j.ceca.2010.08.003 (2010). [PubMed: 20801505] 
42. Masuyama R et al. TRPV4-mediated calcium influx regulates terminal differentiation of 
osteoclasts. Cell Metab 8, 257–265, doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2008.08.002 (2008). [PubMed: 18762026] 
43. Grynkiewicz G, Poenie M & Tsien RY A new generation of Ca2+ indicators with greatly improved 
fluorescence properties. J Biol Chem 260, 3440–3450 (1985). [PubMed: 3838314] 
44. Missiaen L, Luyten T, Bultynck G, Parys JB & De Smedt H Measurement of intracellular Ca2+ 
release in intact and permeabilized cells using 45Ca2+. Cold Spring Harb Protoc 2014, 263–270, 
doi:10.1101/pdb.top066126 (2014). [PubMed: 24591684] 
45. Storkebaum E et al. Impaired autonomic regulation of resistance arteries in mice with low vascular 
endothelial growth factor or upon vascular endothelial growth factor trap delivery. Circulation 122, 
273–281, doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.109.929364 (2010). [PubMed: 20606119] 
46. Laperre K et al. Development of micro-CT protocols for in vivo follow-up of mouse bone 
architecture without major radiation side effects. Bone 49, 613–622, doi:10.1016/
j.bone.2011.06.031 (2011). [PubMed: 21763477] 
47. Bouxsein ML et al. Guidelines for assessment of bone microstructure in rodents using micro-
computed tomography. J Bone Miner Res 25, 1468–1486, doi:10.1002/jbmr.141 (2010). [PubMed: 
20533309] 
48. Callewaert F et al. Differential regulation of bone and body composition in male mice with 
combined inactivation of androgen and estrogen receptor-alpha. FASEB J 23, 232–240, 
doi:10.1096/fj.08-113456 (2009). [PubMed: 18809737] 
49. Verhaeghe J, Van Herck E, Van Bree R, Van Assche FA & Bouillon R Osteocalcin during the 
reproductive cycle in normal and diabetic rats. J Endocrinol 120, 143–151 (1989). [PubMed: 
2783957] 
50. Dempster DW et al. Standardized nomenclature, symbols, and units for bone histomorphometry: a 
2012 update of the report of the ASBMR Histomorphometry Nomenclature Committee. J Bone 
Miner Res 28, 2–17, doi:10.1002/jbmr.1805 (2013). [PubMed: 23197339] 
Stegen et al. Page 40
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 41 ===
Figure 1. Skeletal dysplasia in Phd2chon- mice
(a) Safranin O staining of the growth plate of neonatal (P2.5) mice, with quantification of 
the total length (TL), of the proliferating (PZ) and hypertrophic zone (HZ) (n=8 mice). (b) 
3D microCT models of the tibial metaphysis and quantification of trabecular bone volume 
(TBV) in neonatal (n=10 mice) and adult (14 weeks) mice (n=10 Phd2chon+ − 8 Phd2chon- 
mice). (c) Safranin O staining of the tibia of adult mice with quantification of the percentage 
Safranin O (SafO) positive matrix (red) relative to BV (n=8 Phd2chon+ − 9 Phd2chon- mice). 
(d) P-AMPKT172 and AMPK immunoblot, with quantification of p-AMPKT172 to AMPK 
ratio. Representative images of 4 independent experiments are shown. (e) BrdU 
immunostaining of neonatal growth plates with quantification of the percentage BrdU-
positive cells (n=6 mice). (f) Collagen synthesis in cultured chondrocytes (n=8 biologically 
independent samples). Data are means ± SD in (a-c, e), or means ± SEM in (d, f). **p<0.01 
vs. Phd2chon+, ***p<0.001 vs. Phd2chon+ (two-sided Student’s t-test). Exact p values: 
0.0000002 (TL; a), 0.00001 (PZ; a), 0.0005 (HZ; a), 0.00001 (P2,5; b), 0.0006 (14w; b), 
0.004 (c), 0.004 (d), 0.0002 (e), 0.0004 (f). Scale bar in (a) is 250 μm, scale bars in (c) and 
(e) are 100 μm.
Stegen et al. Page 41
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 42 ===
Figure 2. Altered collagen processing in Phd2chon- growth plates
(a) Type II collagen (COL2) levels in neonatal (P2.5) growth plates, analysed by SDS page 
and Coomassie staining. Protein loading was normalized to growth plate weight. 
Representative images of 2 experiments, each with 2 biologically independent replicates, are 
shown. (b) P4ha1, Ph4ha2, P3h1, Plod1, Plod2, Pdi and Lox mRNA levels in neonatal 
growth plates (n=4 biologically independent samples). (c) Hydroxyproline (OH-Pro) content 
in neonatal growth plates, normalized for tissue weight (n=6 biologically independent 
samples). (d) Mass spectral analysis of Pro744 and Pro795 hydroxylation in peptides 
Stegen et al. Page 42
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 43 ===
obtained after in-gel trypsin digest of the α1(II) chain of collagen extracted from neonatal 
growth plates. Representative images of 4 biologically independent samples are shown. Hyp 
is hydroxyproline. (e) Hydroxylysylpyridinoline (HP) and lysylpyridinoline (LP) content 
and total pyridinoline (Pyr) cross-links (total) in neonatal growth plates, normalized for 
tissue weight (n=4 biologically independent samples). (f) OH-Pro content in neonatal 
growth plates (GP) and supernatant (SN), after incubation with MMP9 or MMP13 (n=5 
biologically independent samples). Data are means ± SD. *p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+, **p<0.01 
vs. Phd2chon+, ***p<0.001 vs. Phd2chon+ (two-sided Student’s t-test). Exact p values: 0.0009 
(a), 0.045 (P4ha1; b), 0.0013 (P4ha2; b), 0.006 (P3h1; b), 0.0017 (Plod1; b), 0.002 (Plod2; 
b), 0.010 (Pdi; b), 0.03 (Lox; b), 0.00004 (c), 0.007 (HP; e), 0.014 (total; e).
Stegen et al. Page 43
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 44 ===
Figure 3. Enhanced collagen hydroxylation relies on glutamine-dependent α-ketoglutarate 
production
(a) Intracellular α-ketoglutarate (αKG) levels in cultured chondrocytes (n=3 biologically 
independent samples). (b) Fractional contribution of 13C5-glutamine (Gln) to αKG (n=3 
biologically independent samples). (c) Hydroxyproline (OH-Pro) content in neonatal growth 
plates of mice treated with BPTES, with or without αKG (n=6 for Phd2chon+-veh, 
Phd2chon--BPTES or Phd2chon--BPTES+αKG mice; and n=7 for Phd2chon+-BPTES, 
Phd2chon+-BPTES+αKG or Phd2chon--veh mice). (d) Safranin O staining of the tibia of mice 
treated with BPTES, with or without αKG, and quantification of the percentage Safranin O 
(SafO) positive matrix relative to bone volume (BV) (n=5 for Phd2chon+-BPTES mice; n=6 
for Phd2chon+-veh or Phd2chon--veh mice; and n=7 for Phd2chon+-BPTES+αKG, Phd2chon--
BPTES or Phd2chon--BPTES+αKG mice). Scale bar is 250 μm. Data are means ± SEM in 
(a, b), or means ± SD in (c,d). ***p<0.001 vs. Phd2chon+ (two-sided Student’s t-test), 
#p<0.05 (ANOV A), §p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+-veh, °p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon--veh (ANOV A). Exact 
p values: 0.0009 (a); 0.00004 (b); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon--veh 0.0010 (c) or 0.00001 
(d); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon+-BPTES 0.000001 (c) or 0.00003 (d); Phd2chon+-veh vs. 
Phd2chon--BPTES+αKG 0.005 (c) or 0.000002 (d); Phd2chon+-BPTES vs. Phd2chon+-
BPTES+αKG 0.0000001 (c); Phd2chon--veh vs. Phd2chon--BPTES 0.00005 (c) or 0.0000002 
(d); Phd2chon--BPTES vs. Phd2chon--BPTES+αKG 0.0003 (c).
Stegen et al. Page 44
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript

=== PAGE 45 ===
Figure 4. Stimulating glucose oxidation in PHD2-deficient chondrocytes avoids energy deficit and 
restores collagen synthesis
P-AMPKT172 and AMPK immunoblot with quantification of p-AMPKT172 to AMPK ratio 
in cultured chondrocytes, with or without DCA treatment. Representative images of 3 
independent experiments are shown. (b) Collagen synthesis in cultured chondrocytes, with 
or without DCA treatment (n=6 biologically independent samples). (c) Safranin O staining 
of the tibia of mice treated with DCA, with or without BPTES, with quantification of the 
percentage Safranin O (SafO) positive matrix relative to bone volume (BV) (n=5 for 
Phd2chon+-veh or Phd2chon--veh mice; n=7 for Phd2chon+-DCA, Phd2chon+-DCA+BPTES, 
Phd2chon--DCA, Phd2chon--DCA+BPTES mice). Scale bar is 250 μm. Data are means ± 
SEM in (a, b), or means ± SD in (c). #p<0.05 (ANOV A), §p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon+-veh, 
°p<0.05 vs. Phd2chon--veh (ANOV A). Exact p values: Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon--veh 0.03 
(a), 0.0000002 (b) or 0.0014 (c); Phd2chon--veh vs. Phd2chon--DCA 0.013 (a), 0.00013 (b) or 
0.0006 (c); Phd2chon+-veh vs. Phd2chon+-DCA+BPTES 0.0006 (c); Phd2chon+-veh vs. 
Phd2chon--DCA 0.000003 (c); Phd2chon--veh vs. Phd2chon--DCA+BPTES 0.0002 (c).
Stegen et al. Page 45
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2020 May 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
