Catch-Up Growth Is Associated with Delayed
Senescence of the Growth Plate in Rabbits
RACHEL I. GAFNI, MARTINA WEISE, DANIEL T. ROBRECHT, JODI L. MEYERS,
KEVIN M. BARNES, STACY DE-LEVI, AND JEFFREY BARON
Unit on Growth and Development, Developmental Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, U.S.A.
In mammals, release from growth-inhibiting conditions re-
sults in catch-up growth. To explain this phenomenon, we pro-
posed the following model: 1) The normal senescent decline in
growth plate function depends not on age per se , but on the
cumulative number of replications that growth plate chondro-
cytes have undergone. 2) Conditions that suppress growth plate
chondrocyte proliferation therefore slow senescence. 3) After
transient growth inhibition, growth plates are thus less senescent
and hence show a greater growth rate than expected for age,
resulting in catch-up growth. To test this model, we administered
dexamethasone to growing rabbits to suppress linear growth.
After stopping dexamethasone, catch-up growth occurred. In
distal femoral growth plates of untreated controls, we observed a
senescent decline in the growth rate and in the heights of the
proliferative zone, hypertrophic zone, and total growth plate.
During the period of catch-up growth, in the animals previously
treated with dexamethasone, the senescent decline in all these
variables was delayed. Prior treatment with dexamethasone also
delayed epiphyseal fusion. These ﬁndings support our model that
linear catch-up growth is caused, at least in part, by a delay in
growth plate senescence. (Pediatr Res 50: 618–623, 2001)
More than 35 y ago, Prader, Tanner, and von Harnack
observed that children undergo supranormal linear growth after
release from growth-inhibiting conditions (1). This phenome-
non, termed catch-up growth, was attributed to a CNS mech-
anism that compares the individual’s actual body size with an
age-appropriate set-point and then adjusts the growth rate
accordingly (2). However, this neuroendocrine hypothesis has
not been subjected to a deﬁnitive experimental test.
More recently, we demonstrated that transient growth inhi-
bition within a single growth plate is followed by local
catch-up growth (3). This local catch-up growth cannot be
readily explained by a systemic mechanism, which would have
affected all the growth plates equally. Instead, it suggests that
catch-up growth is due, at least in part, to a mechanism
intrinsic to the growth plate.
To account for this ﬁnding, we speculated that catch-up
growth might be caused by a delay in the process of growth
plate senescence. The growth plate, a layer of cartilage located
between the epiphysis and the metaphysis of mammalian long
bones, is composed of three distinct zones: the resting zone,
proliferative zone, and hypertrophic zone. With increasing age,
the growth plate undergoes a program of structural and func-
tional changes. These senescent changes include a progressive
decline in the growth rate accompanied by a decrease in the
heights of the proliferative zone (4), the hypertrophic zone (5),
and the overall growth plate (6). In some mammals, including
humans and rabbits, the senescent growth plates are eventually
replaced by bone tissue, a process termed epiphyseal fusion.
Speciﬁcally, to explain the mechanism underlying local
catch-up growth, we hypothesized that growth plate senes-
cence is not a function of age per se , but rather of the
cumulative number of cell divisions that the chondrocytes have
undergone. Glucocorticoid excess and other growth-inhibiting
conditions slow linear growth (7), in part, by decreasing the
proliferation rate of growth plate chondrocytes (5, 8). Accord-
ing to our hypothesis, this decrease in proliferation rate would
slow growth plate senescence. If the growth-inhibiting condi-
tion resolves, the growth plates would be less senescent and
therefore grow more rapidly than expected for age, resulting in
catch-up growth.
To test this model, in the current study we transiently
inhibited longitudinal bone growth in rabbits by administering
glucocorticoid systemically. We then stopped the glucocorti-
coid treatment and assessed markers of growth plate senes-
cence to determine whether senescence had, in fact, been
delayed by the previous growth inhibition.
Received December 11, 2000; accepted June 27, 2001.
Correspondence and reprint requests: Rachel I. Gafni, M.D., National Institutes of
Health, Building 10, Room 10N262, 10 Center Drive MSC 1862, Bethesda, MD 20892-
1862, U.S.A.; e-mail: gafnir@mail.nih.gov
Presented in part at the Annual Meeting of the Society for Pediatric Research, May 12–16,
Boston, MA, 2000.
0031-3998/01/5005-0618
PEDIATRIC RESEARCH Vol. 50, No. 5, 2001
Copyright © 2001 International Pediatric Research Foundation, Inc. Printed in U.S.A.
ABSTRACT
618
METHODS
Animals. Animals were housed and cared for in accordance
with the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and
Use of Laboratory Animals (9). The experimental procedures
were approved by the National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development Animal Care and Use Committee.
Five-week-old male New Zealand White rabbits (Covance
Research Products, Denver, PA, U.S.A.) were treated with
dexamethasone (Phoenix Pharmaceutical, St. Joseph, MO,
U.S.A.), 0.5 mg/kg per day s.c. for 5 wk. Male New Zealand
White rabbits begin sexual maturation at approximately 2
months of age (10) and undergo epiphyseal fusion by approx-
imately 6 mo of age (11). Treatment was begun at 5 wk of age
to allow sufﬁcient time for induction of growth retardation and
recovery before epiphyseal fusion occurs. Untreated animals
served as concurrent controls. One day after discontinuation of
dexamethasone, all rabbits began receiving oxytetracycline
(Phoenix Pharmaceutical), 10 mg/kg i.m. weekly, to label
newly formed bone. The last dose was give n 1 d before
sacriﬁce. Animals were weighed weekly throughout the study.
Rabbits were killed by pentobarbital overdose at 2, 9, 16, 30,
and 114 d (expressed as 0, 1, 2, 4, and 16 wk for convenience)
after the discontinuation of dexamethasone (eight animals in
each treatment group per time point), and the femurs were
removed. Two of the dexamethasone-treated animals died
before scheduled sacriﬁce, and their femurs were not included
in the analysis.
Femoral length measurement. Left femur length was mea-
sured in triplicate by a single, blinded observer using a digital
caliper (Mitutoyo Corp, Kawasaki, Japan). Length was mea-
sured from the distal femoral articular surface to the greater
trochanter.
Quantitative histology. The right distal femurs were dehy-
drated in serial solutions of graded ethanol followed by clear-
ing in xylene and in ﬁltration with methyl methacrylate. Serial
5-/H9262m sections were cut near-parallel to the long axis of the
femur and stained with Goldner ’s trichrome. Using a light
microscope with a VIA-100 video measurement system (Bo-
eckler, Tuscon, AZ, U.S.A.), the heights of the resting, prolif-
erative, and hypertrophic zones were measured at four sites
along the growth plate by a single, blinded observer and an
average was taken. The four sites were selected a priori
because, at these locations, the growth plate is perpendicular to
the long axis of the bone (Fig. 1). Total growth plate height was
determined by summing the heights of the three zones.
Sections from the 16-wk group were evaluated for growth
plate fusion by a blinded observer. Any areas of growth plate
with chondrocytes arranged in columns, even if disorganized,
were considered unfused. If chondrocyte columns were re-
placed by blood vessels and bone cells or only scattered lone
chondrocytes and cartilage matrix remnants were seen, the area
was considered to be fused. Some sections showed fusion
beginning in one region but not yet involving the entire growth
plate. For these growth plates, the percent fusion was estimated
visually.
Growth rate and proliferation rate. To measure growth rate,
the animals were injected weekly with oxytetracycline, which
is incorporated into bone and can be visualized by ﬂuorescence
microscopy. The ﬁnal dose, give n 1 d before sacri ﬁce, labels
essentially all of the metaphyseal trabecular bone. The previ-
ous dose, give n 8 d before sacri ﬁce, is only incorporated into
bone that had been present at the time that dose was given.
Therefore, the bone formed beneath the growth plate during the
8 d before sacri ﬁce contains only a single band of ﬂuorescent
label whereas the older bone contains more than one band of
label. Thus, the linear growth in the week before sacri ﬁce was
assessed by measuring the height of the single-labeled metaph-
yseal bone beneath the growth plate (Fig. 1). To make this
measurement, unstained 8- /H9262m longitudinal sections of the
distal femoral metaphyses were examined in the same areas
used for quantitative histology (Fig. 1) using a ﬂuorescence
microscope, a videocamera, a computer, and Oncor Image
software (Version 2.0, Oncor Inc., Gaithersburg, MD, U.S.A.).
The four measurements were averaged for each specimen. If no
clear junction between singly and doubly labeled bone could be
identiﬁed, that subregion was not included in the average. For
this reason, growth velocity was unmeasurable in four animals
previously treated with dexamethasone. If the growth plate had
fused and there was no evidence of linear growth by ﬂuores-
cence microscopy, a growth rate of 0 mm/d was recorded. The
observer was blinded to experimental group.
Proliferation rate (new cells per chondrocyte column per
day) was assessed by dividing the growth rate by the height of
the terminal hypertrophic cell according to the method of
Kember and Sissons (12). The terminal hypertrophic cell was
deﬁned, in Goldner’s trichrome-stained sections, as the cell in
the last lacuna not invaded by metaphyseal blood vessels. For
each specimen, the heights of approximately 20 cells were
measured parallel to the chondrocyte columns and the results
averaged. Proliferation rate could not be assessed in fused
growth plates.
Statistical analysis. Data are presented as mean /H11006SEM.
Comparisons between treatment groups and time points were
Figure 1. Diagram of a longitudinal section through the distal femur. The
four single-headed arrows indicate the regions of the growth plate where the
heights of the resting zone, proliferative zone, and hypertrophic zone were
measured. The height of the metaphyseal single-labeled bone was measured
beneath the growth plate in the same four regions.
619GROWTH PLATE SENESCENCE AND CATCH-UP GROWTH
made, where appropriate, using a two-way ANOVA test fol-
lowed by a Tukey test for post hoc pairwise multiple compar-
isons. For analyses of the recovery period, the 0-wk time point
was not included. For analyses of proliferative zone height,
hypertrophic zone height, and total growth plate height, the
16-wk time point was excluded because there was a high
incidence of epiphyseal fusion. Inclusion of the 16-wk time
point would have increased statistical signiﬁcance. Differences
in epiphyseal fusion were analyzed using a Mann-Whitney U
test.
RESULTS
Body weight. During the 5-wk treatment period, dexametha-
sone-treated animals did not gain weight as rapidly as control
animals ( p /H110210.001; Fig. 2). After dexamethasone treatment
was stopped, the treated animals gained weight more rapidly
than controls ( p /H110210.05; Fig. 2). Despite the recovery, differ-
ences in weight were still present at the end of the experiment
(p /H110210.005).
Femoral growth and proliferation. Femoral length in the
dexamethasone-treated animals was 17.4 /H110061.4 mm less than
control animals at the end of the treatment period ( p /H110210.001;
Fig. 3A). Progressive catch-up growth occurred ( p /H110210.001),
reducing this deﬁcit to 1.6 /H110061.6 mm (NS) by 16 wk (Fig. 3A).
Distal femoral growth rates, measured by ﬂuorescence micros-
copy, were not signi ﬁcantly different between the two groups
during the ﬁrst week after the dexamethasone treatment; how-
ever, there was a marked increase in the growth rate of
dexamethasone-treated animals between weeks 1 and 2 of the
recovery period ( p /H110210.001, Fig. 3 B). The growth rate then
gradually decreased yet remained elevated compared with
controls of the same age (Fig. 3B). The proliferation rate of the
growth plate chondrocytes (Fig. 3C), assessed by the method of
Kember and Sissons (12), showed a pattern similar to that of
the femoral growth rate.
Growth plate histologic measurements. In the control ani-
mals, the distal femoral growth plates showed typical senescent
changes; over time, there was a gradual decrease in the heights
of the total growth plate (Fig. 4 A), the proliferative zone (Fig.
4B), and the hypertrophic zone (Fig. 4 C). In the dexametha-
sone-treated animals, at the end of the treatment period, the
Figure 2. Body weight (mean /H11006SEM) during and after dexamethasone (Dex)
treatment. Young rabbits received dexamethasone (5 mg/kg per day, n /H110057)
s.c. for 5 wk and were then allowed to recover for 16 wk. Untreated animals
served as controls ( n /H110058). The box below the curves represents the period of
dexamethasone treatment. At some time points, SEM bars are smaller than the
symbols.
Figure 3. Femoral length (A), distal femoral growth rate (B), and chondrocyte
proliferation rate (C) after stopping dexamethasone treatment (mean /H11006SEM).
Five-week-old rabbits received dexamethasone (0.5 mg/kg per day, n /H110057–8
per time point) s.c. for 5 wk and were then allowed to recover for 0 to 16 wk.
Untreated animals served as controls ( n /H110058 per time point). After dissection,
femoral length was measured with a digital caliper. To measure growth rate,
animals received weekly injections of oxytetracycline. Undecalci ﬁed longitu-
dinal sections were then obtained from the distal femurs, and the growth rates
were determined by ﬂuorescence microscopy. Chondrocyte proliferation rate
was assessed by dividing the growth rate by the height of the terminal
hypertrophic cell.
620 GAFNI ET AL.
heights of the total growth plate, the proliferative zone, and the
hypertrophic zone were decreased compared with controls
(Fig. 4). In the ﬁrst week after the dexamethasone was stopped,
these heights increased then subsequently exhibited a gradual
senescent decline (Fig. 4). The senescent curves for the dexa-
methasone-treated animals appeared right-shifted compared
with controls (p /H110210.001, growth plate and hypertrophic zone;
p /H110210.005, proliferative zone; Fig. 4). The magnitude of the
rightward shift was approximately 3 wk. Thus, at a given time
point, the chondrocyte columns of the treated animals were
longer than those of control animals (Fig. 5 A).
Epiphyseal fusion. At the end of the dexamethasone treat-
ment period, none of the animals had fused distal femoral
epiphyses. By 16 wk of recovery, 88% of the control animals
had fused their distal femoral growth plates compared with
only 14% of the treated animals ( p /H110210.01; Fig. 5 B).
DISCUSSION
In the control animals, the growth plates showed the ex-
pected senescent decline in function and size. With age, the
rate of longitudinal bone growth progressively decreased. This
slowing of growth was accompanied by a gradual decrease in
the rate of chondrocyte proliferation as well as the heights of
the proliferative zone, hypertrophic zone, and total growth
plate. Similar senescent changes have been observed in other
mammalian species (4 –6). In humans, there is a dramatic
decrease in longitudinal bone growth, which begins during
intrauterine life and is interrupted only brie ﬂy by the pubertal
Figure 4. Heights (mean /H11006SEM) of the total growth plate ( A), the prolif-
erative zone ( B), and the hypertrophic zone ( C) of the distal femur after
stopping dexamethasone treatment. Five-week-old rabbits received dexameth-
asone (0.5 mg/kg per day, n /H110057–8 per time point) s.c. for 5 wk and were then
allowed to recover for 0 to 16 wk. Untreated animals served as controls ( n /H11005
8 per time point). Longitudinal sections were obtained from the distal femurs,
and growth plate heights were measured using light microscopy and a video
measurement system.
Figure 5. Distal femoral growth plate structure 1 wk ( A) and 16 wk (B) after
stopping dexamethasone. Five-week-old rabbits received dexamethasone (0.5
mg/kg per day) s.c. for 5 wk and were then allowed to recover. Sections were
stained with Goldner’s trichrome. Scale bar, 200 /H9262m. E, epiphysis; RZ, resting
zone; PZ, proliferative zone; HZ, hypertrophic zone; M, metaphysis. In B, the
growth plate in the control animal has been largely replaced with bone tissue,
indicating epiphyseal fusion.
621GROWTH PLATE SENESCENCE AND CATCH-UP GROWTH
growth spurt (13). The senescent decline in growth rate is
caused by a decrease in the proliferation rate of chondrocytes
in the proliferative zone (4) and in the hypertrophic cell size in
the hypertrophic zone (14). On the basis of growth plate
transplantation experiments, senescence appears to be caused
by a mechanism intrinsic to the growth plate (15).
Administration of systemic glucocorticoid for 5 wk inhibited
longitudinal bone growth. Excess glucocorticoid inhibits linear
growth in large part by suppressing chondrocyte proliferation
(5, 8, 16). After the glucocorticoid was stopped, the treated
animals exhibited catch-up growth. This catch-up growth was
rapid in onset and sustained throughout the period of growth.
This phenomenon of supranormal linear growth after release
from growth-inhibiting conditions has been attributed to a CNS
mechanism (2, 17). However, more recently, we demonstrated
that catch-up growth is due, at least in part, to a mechanism
intrinsic to the growth plate, rather than the CNS (3).
To explain the mechanism underlying local catch-up growth,
we proposed the following model: 1) The normal process of
growth plate senescence depends not on time, per se, but rather
on the cumulative number of replications that the growth plate
chondrocytes have undergone. Thus, as growth plate chondro-
cytes replicate, they become more senescent, and therefore
subsequent replications occur more slowly. 2) Conditions that
inhibit growth plate chondrocyte proliferation therefore slow
growth plate senescence. 3) After transient growth inhibition,
growth plates are thus less senescent and hence grow more
rapidly than expected for age, resulting in catch-up growth.
To test this delayed senescence model, we assessed struc-
tural and functional markers of growth plate senescence during
the recovery period. The model predicts that the decline in
these markers would be delayed in the animals previously
treated with dexamethasone. Our data are consistent with these
predictions; once the effects of the dexamethasone had worn
off, the treated animals showed a delay in the senescent decline
in growth plate structure and function. Speci ﬁcally, the prolif-
erative zone height, hypertrophic zone height, and total growth
plate height of the treated animals were increased compared
with controls of the same age but similar to control animals
approximately 3 wk younger. The same pattern of delay was
seen for the growth rate and chondrocyte proliferation rate,
functional markers of growth plate senescence.
In addition, epiphyseal fusion was delayed in the animals
previously treated with dexamethasone. Epiphyseal fusion de-
notes the replacement of the growth plate by bone tissue. This
process occurs only in senescent growth plates (18). Therefore,
the delayed fusion observed in animals previously treated with
dexamethasone provides further support for the delayed senes-
cence model.
The catch-up growth observed after systemic glucocorticoid
administration in the current study was more complete than
that previously observed after local glucocorticoid administra-
tion (3). This difference may be related to differences in the
nature of the growth inhibition. Local infusion of glucocorti-
coid into the growth plate probably inhibits growth by acting
directly on growth plate chondrocytes (16, 19). Systemic glu-
cocorticoid administration could act on the growth plate both
directly and also indirectly through nutritional and hormonal
mechanisms (20 –22). In the current study, for example, dexa-
methasone impaired weight gain, which may have indirectly
impaired linear growth. These different mechanisms of growth
inhibition might delay growth plate senescence to different
degrees and thus affect the magnitude of the catch-up growth.
Another possible explanation for the difference in complete-
ness of recovery is that both local and systemic mechanisms
might contribute to catch-up growth. It has been suggested, for
example, that increased GH levels might play a role (20, 23).
Increased GH could also explain the observed increased height
of the growth plates. However, increased GH levels would not
explain the observed delay in epiphyseal fusion.
In contrast to the complete catch-up in linear growth, recov-
ery of weight was more gradual, occurred later, and was
incomplete. We did not study the mechanisms contributing to
catch-up in body weight, which probably involve tissues other
than the growth plate. Rabbits do not appear to be a good
model for the glucocorticoid-induced weight changes in hu-
mans; unlike humans, glucocorticoid excess causes weight loss
in rabbits.
Although glucocorticoid excess appears to decrease both
growth rate and growth plate senescence, it is not known
whether other factors that affect growth, including nutritional,
mechanical, and other hormonal conditions, also affect senes-
cence. Indeed, we speculate that some conditions may affect
growth rate not by altering chondrocyte proliferation rate but
rather by altering the amount of cell enlargement in the hyper-
trophic zone (24). In such cases, the rate of senescence may not
be affected.
The delayed senescence model is based on the hypothesis
that growth plate senescence depends on the replicative history
of the growth plate chondrocytes. Such replicative senescence
does occur in other cell types. The limited proliferative capac-
ity of animal cells in culture, the Hay ﬂick phenomenon, ap-
pears to result from replicative senescence (25). Replicative
senescence also probably occurs in vivo (26). The underlying
mechanisms are not fully understood but may include telomere
shortening (27) and increased expression of genes that nega-
tively regulate progression through the cell cycle (26).
In summary, our ﬁndings are consistent with the hypothesis
that the normal decline in the linear growth rate is caused by
replicative senescence of growth plate chondrocytes. The re-
sults further suggest that catch-up growth is due, at least in
part, to a delay in the normal program of growth plate
senescence.
Acknowledgments. We thank Edward F. McCarthy, M.D.,
and Tracy Hatcher for technical assistance.
REFERENCES
1. Prader A, Tanner JM, von Harnack GA 1963 Catch-up growth following illness or
starvation. J Pediatr 62:646 –659
2. Tanner JM 1963 Regulation of growth in size in mammals. Nature 199:845 –850
3. Baron J, Klein KO, Colli MJ, Yanovski JA, Novosad JA, Bacher JD, Cutler Jr GB
1994 Catch-up growth after glucocorticoid excess: a mechanism intrinsic to the
growth plate. Endocrinology 135:1367 –1371
4. Walker KVR, Kember NF 1972 Cell kinetics of growth cartilage in the rat tibia. II.
Measurements during ageing. Cell Tissue Kinet 5:409 –419
5. Kember NF, Walker KVR 1971 Control of bone growth in rats. Nature 229:428 –429
622 GAFNI ET AL.
6. Masoud I, Shapiro F, Moses A 1986 Tibial epiphyseal development: a cross-sectional
histologic and histomorphometric study in the New Zealand white rabbit. J Orthop
Res 4:212–220
7. Allen DB 1996 Growth suppression by glucocorticoid therapy. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am 25:699 –717
8. Annefeld M 1992 Changes in rat epiphyseal cartilage after treatment with dexameth-
asone and glycosaminoglycan-peptide complex. Pathol Res Pract 188:649 –652
9. National Research Council 1996 Guide for the care and use of laboratory animals.
Washington, DC, National Academy Press
10. Berger M, Jean-Faucher C, de Turckheim M, Veyssiere G, Blanc MR, Poirier JC,
Jean C 1982 Testosterone, luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle stimulating hormone
(FSH) in plasma of rabbit from birth to adulthood: correlation with sexual and
behavioural development. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh) 99:459 –465
11. Gilsanz V, Roe TF, Gibbens DT, Schulz EE, Carlson ME, Gonzalez O, Boechat MI
1988 Effect of sex steroids on peak bone density of growing rabbits. Am J Physiol
255:E416–E421
12. Kember NF, Sissons HA 1976 Quantitative histology of the human growth plate.
J Bone Joint Surg Br 58-B:426 –435
13. Tanner JM, Whitehouse RH, Takaishi M 1966 Standards from birth to maturity for
height, weight, height velocity and weight velocity: British children, 1965 I. Arch Dis
Child 41:454 –471
14. Kuhn JL, DeLacey JH, Leenellett EE 1996 Relationship between bone growth rate
and hypertrophic chondrocyte volume in New Zealand white rabbits of varying ages.
J Orthop Res 14:706 –711
15. Stevens DG, Boyer MI, Bowen CV 1999 Transplantation of epiphyseal plate allo-
grafts between animals of different ages. J Pediatr Orthop 19:398 –403
16. Robson H, Anderson E, Eden OB, Isaksson O, Shalet S 1998 Chemotherapeutic
agents used in the treatment of childhood malignancies have direct effects on growth
plate chondrocyte proliferation. J Endocrinol 157:225 –235
17. Mosier HD 1978 Catch-up and proportionate growth. Med Clin North Am 62:337 –
350
18. Sissons HA, Kember NF 1977 Longitudinal bone growth of the human femur.
Postgrad Med J 53:433 –437
19. Jux C, Leiber K, Hugel U, Blum W, Ohlsson C, Klaus G, Mehls O 1998 Dexameth-
asone impairs growth hormone (GH)-stimulated growth by suppression of local
insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I production and expression of GH- and IGF-I-
receptor in cultured rat chondrocytes. Endocrinology 139:3296 –3305
20. Marin G, Malozowski SN, Barnes K, Southers J, Cristiano A, Cassorla F 1993
Endocrine proﬁle of catch-up growth in the cynomolgus monkey. Acta Endocrinol
(Copenh) 129:371–374
21. Heinrichs C, Colli M, Yanovski JA, Laue L, Gerstl NA, Kramer AD, Uyeda JA,
Baron J 1997 Effects of fasting on the growth plate: systemic and local mechanisms.
Endocrinology 138:5359 –5365
22. Krieg Jr RJ, Niimi K, Chan JC, Santos F, Hanna JD, Poletti LF 1991 Cortisone
effects on growth, food ef ﬁciency, and in vitro growth hormone release. Kidney
Int 39:1135 –1139
23. Mosier Jr HD, Jansons RA 1976 Growth hormone during catch-up growth and failure
of catch-up growth in rats. Endocrinology 98:214 –219
24. Wang J, Zhou J, Bondy CA 1999 Igf1 promotes longitudinal bone growth by
insulin-like actions augmenting chondrocyte hypertrophy. FASEB J 13:1985 –
1990
25. Hay ﬂick L 1965 The limited in vitro lifetime of human diploid strains. Exp Cell Res
37:614–636
26. Campisi J 1996 Replicative senescence: an old lives ’ tale? Cell 84:497 –500
27. Sedivy JM 1998 Can ends justify the means? Telomeres and the mechanisms of
replicative senescence and immortalization in mammalian cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 95:9078 –9081
623GROWTH PLATE SENESCENCE AND CATCH-UP GROWTH