Academic Editor: Maria-Jose Alcaraz
Received: 31 December 2024
Revised: 9 February 2025
Accepted: 11 February 2025
Published: 13 February 2025
Citation: Zhang, D.; Wang, L.; Tang,
L.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Zou, L.
Protective Effect of Methyl Sulfonyl
Methane on the Progression of
Age-Induced Bone Loss by Regulating
Oxidative Stress-Mediated Bone
Resorption. Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
antiox14020216
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Protective Effect of Methyl Sulfonyl Methane on the Progression
of Age-Induced Bone Loss by Regulating Oxidative
Stress-Mediated Bone Resorption
Duo Zhang 1, Leilei Wang 2, Lu Tang 1
 , Yeting Zhang 1, Huaiyong Zhang 2,3, *
 and Lin Zou 1,*
1 Physical Education Department, Civil Aviation Flight University of China, Guanghan 618307, China;
summer@cafuc.edu.cn (D.Z.); lutangcafuc@163.com (L.T.); zhangyt@cafuc.edu.cn (Y.Z.)
2 Key Laboratory of Animal Biochemistry and Nutrition of Agriculture Ministry, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450046, China; wl911152@163.com
3 Laboratory for Animal Nutrition and Animal Product Quality, Department of Animal Sciences and Aquatic
Ecology, Ghent University, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
* Correspondence: huaiyong.zhang@ugent.be (H.Z.); zoulin@cafuc.edu.cn (L.Z.)
Abstract: Aging is associated with detrimental bone loss, often leading to fragility fractures,
which may be driven by oxidative stress. In this study, the outcomes of comparing the
differences among young, adult and aged C57BL/6J mice found that the trabecular bone
volume was significantly lower in the aged mice compared to young mice, and the bone
characteristics were significantly correlated with the oxidative status. To counteract the
adverse effects of aging, methyl sulfonyl methane (MSM), a stable metabolite of dimethyl
sulfoxide, was used to supplement the drinking water (400 mg/kg/day) of the aged mice
(73 weeks old) for 8 weeks. The MSM supplementation improved the maximum load, bone
microarchitecture, and mRNA levels of osteocyte-specific genes in the tibia. Furthermore,
MSM reduced the serum level of the C-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen, a marker
of bone resorption, and downregulated the mRNA levels of genes related to osteoclast
proliferation and activity. MSM also decreased the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines
in both the serum and bone marrow. Importantly, the MSM-treated mice exhibited an
enhanced antioxidant status, characterized by increased glutathione peroxidase (GPx)
activity and glutathione concentration in plasma, erythrocytes and bone marrow. These
improvements were linked to the activation of the nuclear factor E2 related factor 2 (Nrf2)
pathway and its downstream antioxidant gene expression, including that of superoxide
dismutase and GPx. These findings suggested that age-related bone loss is closely tied to
oxidative stress, and MSM supplementation effectively reverses bone loss by mitigating
oxidative stress-mediated bone resorption.
Keywords: age-related bone loss; oxidative stress; MSM; bone resorption
1. Introduction
Aging is a natural, complex, and irreversible pathophysiological process characterized
by a gradual decline in physiological functions, increasing the risk of diseases and mortality.
A comprehensive understanding of the aging process and its mechanisms is crucial for
developing therapeutic strategies for age-related diseases. Bone problems, commonly
associated with aging, are often accompanied by osteoporosis, a condition marked by com-
promised bone microstructure and reduced bone mass [1]. This arises from an imbalance in
bone remodeling, resulting in excessive bone resorption and impaired bone formation [2].
Notably, aging is frequently accompanied by oxidative stress due to disrupted balance
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox14020216
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 2 of 16
between antioxidants and oxidants [3], leading to the overproduction of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) [ 4]. Antioxidant defenses, comprising both endogenous and exogenous
antioxidants such as catalase (CAT), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and glutathione peroxi-
dase (GPx), protect tissues and organs from free radical damage [3]. Increasing evidence
suggests that oxidative stress plays a critical role in disrupting bone mass homeostasis [5,6].
For example, SOD1 knockout mice exhibited a reduced bone turnover and low bone mass,
and vitamin C supplementation could restore bone mass [ 7]. Additionally, age-related
increases in osteocyte and osteoblast apoptosis, and decreases in bone remodeling, bone
formation, bone mineral density, and bone strength have been linked to an elevated ROS
level and diminished glutathione reductase (GR) activity; however, these effects could
be mitigated by antioxidants such as N-acetyl-L-cysteine [8]. These findings suggest that
age-related bone loss may be closely linked to increased oxidative stress.
Methyl sulfonyl methane (MSM), a stable metabolite of dimethyl sulfoxide, plays a
role in the sulfur cycle and is widely present in both animals and humans. MSM is primarily
absorbed in the small intestine and passively diffuses across cell membranes, including
the blood–brain barrier [ 9]. Research has indicated that intestinal absorption of MSM
was unsaturable and carrier-independent, with the absorbed compound being rapidly
distributed to various tissues [ 10]. After administering a single oral dose of 500 mg/kg
MSM to rats, the compound was rapidly absorbed within 2.1 h, exhibited a half-life
of 12.2 h, and was predominantly excreted via urine (approximately 85.8%), with only
3% excreted through feces [ 11]. Previous evidence revealed that MSM demonstrated a
wide range of biological functions, including antioxidant activity, free-radical scavenging,
immune modulation, anti-inflammatory effects, alleviation of muscle soreness, antiallergic
properties, and anticancer effects [ 12]. Specifically, MSM suppressed the production of
pro-inflammatory mediators such as prostaglandin E2, nitric oxide (NO), interleukin-6
(IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) by inhibiting the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB)
signaling pathway [13]. Additionally, MSM mitigated monocrotaline-induced reduction in
serum antioxidant status in pulmonary hypertensive rats [14]. Notably, MSM regulated
the balance between antioxidant enzymes and ROS through transcription factors such
as NF-κB, nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), p53, and signal transducers
and activators of transcription (STAT) [12]. Importantly, studies have shown that MSM
supplementation promoted osteoblast differentiation by upregulating osteoblast- and
osteogenic-specific markers, including runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), alkaline
phosphatase (ALP), osteocalcin (OCN), and bone sialoprotein (BSP) [ 15,16], suggesting
that MSM supplementation may serve as an effective adjunctive treatment for age-related
bone loss.
In this study, we hypothesized that oxidative stress contributes to age-induced bone
loss and that MSM supplementation could mitigate this loss by modulating oxidative
stress. This investigation aims to provide insights into the potential application of MSM in
treating bone diseases associated with aging. To test this hypothesis, histological analysis,
µCT scanning, and oxidative status assessments were conducted to explore the molecular
mechanisms linking MSM to bone metabolism.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Animals and Diets
Three-week-old weanling C57BL/6J male mice were used in this trial. The mice were
housed in a temperature- and humidity-controlled room with a standard 12 h light/dark
cycle, maintained at 21–22 ◦C and 50–70% relative humidity. They had ad libitum access to
water and a diet formulated to meet nutritional requirements based on the AIN-93 standard
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 3 of 16
(Table S1). All procedures adhered to the ethical guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee of Henan Agricultural University (Approval No. HNND2021-12).
2.2. Study Design
A total of 24 3-week-old weanling C57BL/6J male mice were housed in groups of
4 per cage and fed the same diet to investigate the age-related alterations in bone mass and
antioxidant status. Body weight was recorded every two weeks. Mice were categorized as
young (8 weeks), adult (32 weeks) and aged (72 weeks), with samples collected from each
cage, according to Figure 1A. The left tibia and blood were harvested and stored at −80 ◦C
for further analysis. To evaluate whether reducing oxidative stress could reverse age-
related bone loss, MSM, an antioxidant reagent (Figure S1A), was used in this study. After a
one-week acclimatization period, 24 aged (73-week-old) C57BL/6J mice were divided into
two groups and administered either 0 (Age) or 400 mg/kg/day of MSM (Aged + MSM) for
8 weeks, as shown in Figure S1B. MSM, obtained from Bergstrom Nutrition (Vancouver,
Washington, DC, USA), was dissolved in drinking water, and the dosage was based on
a previous study [17]. All mice were fed the same AIN-93 diet. During the experimental
period, body weight, feed intake and water consumption were recorded every four weeks
(at 77 and 81 weeks of age). Blood, bone marrow, and proximal tibia samples were collected
for further analysis.
Antioxidants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 16 
 
(Table S1). All procedures adhered to the ethical guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care 
and Use Committee of Henan Agricultural University (Approval No. HNND2021-12). 
2.2. Study Design 
A total of 24 3-week-old weanling C57BL/6J male mice were housed in groups of 4 per 
cage and fed the same diet to investigate the age-related alterations in bone mass and antioxi-
dant status. Body weight was recorded every two weeks. Mice were categorized as young (8 
weeks), adult (32 weeks) and aged (72 weeks), with samples collected from each cage, accord-
ing to Figure 1A. The left tibia and blood were harvested and stored at −80 °C for further anal-
ysis. To evaluate whether reducing oxidative stress could reverse age-related bone loss, MSM, 
an antioxidant reagent (Figure S1A), was used in this study. After a one-week acclimatization 
period, 24 aged (73-week-old) C57BL/6J mice were divided into two groups and administered 
either 0 (Age) or 400 mg/kg/day of MSM (Aged + MSM) for 8 weeks, as shown in Figure S1B. 
MSM, obtained from Bergstrom Nutrition (Vancouver, Washington, DC, USA), was dissolved 
in drinking water, and the dosage was based on a previous study [17]. All mice were fed the 
same AIN-93 diet. During the experimental period, body weight, feed intake and water con-
sumption were recorded every four weeks (at 77 and 81 weeks of age). Blood, bone marrow, 
and proximal tibia samples were collected for further analysis. 
 
Figure 1. Aging-induced bone loss in mice. (A) Mice were categorized as young (8 weeks), adult (32 
weeks) and aged (72 weeks). (B ) Body weight. (C) Micro-CT images of tibia trabecular bone. Tibia 
trabecular bone parameters including  (D) the ratio of bone volume to total volume (BV/TV), ( E) 
trabecular number (Tb.N), ( F) trabecular thickness (Tb.Th), (G) trabecular connectivity density 
(Tb.Cd), and (H) trabecular spaces (Tb.Sp). a,b Values (mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with diﬀer-
ent letters represent statistical signiﬁcance at p < 0.05. 
2.3. Assessment of Bone Mass Using µCT-Scans 
Bone mass was assessed using a µCT scanner equipped with an X-Ray WorX directional 
X-ray tube (X-RAY WorX GmbH, Garbsen, Germany) and a Perkin-Elmer flat-panel detector 
(PerkinElmer, Inc., Shelton, CT, USA) measuring 40 × 40 cm, with a pixel pitch of 200 µm [18]. 
Figure 1. Aging-induced bone loss in mice. ( A) Mice were categorized as young (8 weeks), adult
(32 weeks) and aged (72 weeks). ( B) Body weight. ( C) Micro-CT images of tibia trabecular bone.
Tibia trabecular bone parameters including (D) the ratio of bone volume to total volume (BV/TV),
(E) trabecular number (Tb.N), (F) trabecular thickness (Tb.Th), (G) trabecular connectivity density
(Tb.Cd), and ( H) trabecular spaces (Tb.Sp). a,b Values (mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with
different letters represent statistical significance at p < 0.05.
2.3. Assessment of Bone Mass Using µCT-Scans
Bone mass was assessed using a µCT scanner equipped with an X-Ray WorX direc-
tional X-ray tube (X-RAY WorX GmbH, Garbsen, Germany) and a Perkin-Elmer flat-panel
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 4 of 16
detector (PerkinElmer, Inc., Shelton, CT, USA) measuring 40 × 40 cm, with a pixel pitch of
200 µm [18]. The scanning parameters were as follows: a tube voltage of 130 kV , a beam
power of 10 W, and no beam filtration. Each scan consisted of 2001 projections taken over a
360◦ rotation, with an exposure time of 1 s per projection. The resulting voxel size was 4µm.
Reconstruction and analysis of the 2D slice stack were performed using custom scripts in
version 1.8 of ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, USA). Analyzed parameters included
trabecular bone characteristics such as bone-volume-to-total-volume ratio (BV/TV , %),
trabecular number (Tb.N, No./mm), thickness (Tb.Th, mm), separation (Tb.Sp, mm), and
connectivity density (Tb.Cd, mm3). Cortical bone properties were also assessed, including
cortical area (Ct.Ar, mm 2), thickness (Ct.Th, mm), and bone mineral density (Ct.BMD,
mgHA/cm3).
2.4. Mechanical Testing of Tibia
Following the µCT scan, the tibiae were subjected to a 3-point bending test to evaluate
the mechanical properties of tibia. The loading point was applied to the mid-diaphysis of
each tibia until bone failure occurred. Force–displacement data were recorded and used to
calculate the whole bone stiffness (the slope of the linear portion of the load–displacement
curve, N/mm) and the maximum force (max. load, Newtons) as described previously [19].
2.5. Osteoclast Frequency Determination
A part of the left tibia was harvested during dissection and fixed in 10% neutral-
buffered formalin for 3 d, then decalcified in 14% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)
for 14 d. The samples were embedded following dehydration in 100% ethanol. The 10 µm
thick frontal sections were stained with tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) (Sigma-
Aldrich chemicals, St. Louis, MO, USA) to visualize the number of osteoclasts per bone
perimeter (N.Oc/B.Pm) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
2.6. Serum Biochemical Markers of Bone Turnover
C-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen (CTx), a marker of bone resorption, was
measured using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (MyBioSource, Inc.,
San Diego, CA, USA). Biochemical markers of bone formation, including N-terminal
propeptide of procollagen type I (P1NP) and osteocalcin (OCN), were quantified using
corresponding ELISA kits obtained from Immunodiagnostic Systems (Boldon, UK) and
Immutopics International (San Clemente, CA, USA), respectively.
2.7. Oxidative Stability Measures
Plasma, erythrocyte, and bone marrow measurements were employed to evaluate
the alterations in oxidative stability due to aging and MSM treatment. Buffered aqueous
extracts of bone marrow were prepared by mixing with 1% Triton X-100 phosphate buffer
(pH 7; 50 mmol/L), followed by homogenization, centrifugation, and filtration. Total
malondialdehyde (MDA) contents in extracts and plasma, an indicator of lipid oxida-
tion, were measured using the thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) method
with spectrophotometry at 532 nm, as described by Grotto et al. [ 20]. GPx activities in
extracts and plasma, defined as the amount of sample required to oxidize 1 µmol of
2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine (DNPH) per min at 25 ◦C, were quantified by monitoring
changes in NADPH oxidation using a Multi-Mode Microplate Reader at 340 nm [ 21].
SOD activity in bone marrow, expressed as the percentage inhibition of pyrogallol autox-
idation, was determined by measuring absorbance changes at 420 nm over 5 min using
spectrophotometry. Plasma SOD level was measured using a commercial kit (Nanjing
Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute, Nanjing, China). To quantify glutathione (GSH) and
glutathione disulfide (GSSG), erythrocytes were harvested by centrifugation (3000 × g,
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 5 of 16
15 min), lysed with 70% metaphosphoric acid, and the lysate was collected. GSH and
GSSG concentrations were determined via high-performance liquid chromatography, using
γ-glutamyl-glutamate as an internal standard, iodoacetic acid as a thiol-quenching agent,
and 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene as a derivatization reagent. Separation was performed on
an aminopropyl column with absorbance measured at 365 nm. GSH and GSSG concen-
trations were normalized to protein content, and the GSSG/GSH ratio was calculated as
previously described [22].
2.8. Measurement of Cytokine Levels
To evaluate the effect of MSM on inflammatory response in aged mice, pro-
inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin (IL)-1 β, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-
alpha (TNF-α), and the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 were measured using ELISA kits
according to the manufacturer’s protocols. All kits were purchased from R&D Systems, Inc.
(Minneapolis, MN, USA).
2.9. Gene Expression Analysis
The proximal tibia and bone marrow samples were ground in liquid nitrogen and
mixed with Trizol reagent (Sigma-Aldrich) to extract total RNA. After assessing RNA qual-
ity and concentration, the extracted RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA following the
kit instructions. A qPCR system was established using both glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and β-actin as the internal reference. The reaction conditions
were set as follows: 95 ◦C for 30 s, followed by 40 cycles of 95 ◦C for 5 s and 60 ◦C for 34 s.
Primers were designed using online Primer 3 website (https://primer3.ut.ee/, accessed
on 1 December 2023) and shown in Table S2. The mRNA expressions of target genes were
normalized using housekeeping gene β-actin [23].
2.10. Statistical Analysis
The data from the present study were analyzed using IBM SPSS Statistics software for
Windows Version 22.0 (SPSS Inc., USA) and were presented as mean± standard deviation
(SD). With a minimum effect size of 1.0, a statistical power exceeding 0.80 was achieved. The
Shapiro–Wilk test was used to check the normality of the data distribution, and Levene’s
test was applied to assess the homogeneity of variance. One-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA), followed by Tukey’s post hoc test, was performed to evaluate the age-related
differences in bone parameters and physiological indices among young, adult, and aged
male mice. Comparisons between aged mice and aged mice treated with MSM were
conducted using a two-tailed unpaired t-test. Additionally, Pearson’s correlation analysis
was used to examine relationships between the parameters of bone mass and oxidative
status, while survival rate was assessed using the Kaplan–Meier method. To define the
relationship between body weight and age, logistic analysis was conducted by GraphPad
Prism (Version 8.0, GraphPad Software Inc., CA, USA). Statistical significance was defined
as p < 0.05.
3. Results
3.1. Bone Loss Was Caused by Aging in Rodent Model
As shown in Figure 1A, the mice were categorized into three age groups, i.e., young
(8 weeks), adult (32 weeks) and aged (72 weeks). The body weight increased with age,
with significant growth occurring before 22 weeks of age. The growth curve was modeled
as follows: body weight = 39.79 × 3.18/(26.61 × Exp(−1.33 × week) +13.18) (R2 = 0.952;
Figure 1B). The µCT analysis of the tibia revealed that the aged mice exhibited significantly
greater bone loss compared to the young and adult mice (Figure 1C), as indicated by the
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 6 of 16
reduced BV/TV and Tb.N values (p < 0.05; Figure 1D,E). No significant difference in the
Tb.Th value was observed among the three age groups (Figure 1F). However, compared
with the young mice, the aged mice displayed a decreased tibia Tb.Cd value and increased
tibia Tb.Sp value (p < 0.05; Figure 1G,H), both of which were comparable to the adult group.
3.2. Aging Induced Oxidative Stress and Was Related to Bone Loss
The results of the oxidative status revealed that the plasma MDA level was significantly
higher in the aged mice compared to the young and adult mice ( p < 0.05; Figure 2A).
Additionally, the activities of plasma SOD and GPx were decreased in the aged mice
relative to those in the young mice ( p < 0.05; Figure 2B,C). As shown in Figure 2D and
Table S3, the correlations between the bone characteristics and oxidative status indicated
that the plasma MDA level was negatively correlated with the tibia BV/TV , Tb.N, and
Tb.Cd values, but was positively correlated with the tibia Tb.Sp value. Conversely, the
plasma SOD activity exhibited a positive correlation with the tibia BV/TV and Tb.Cd values
and a negative correlation with the tibia Tb.Sp value. Furthermore, the plasma GPx activity
was positively correlated with the tibia Tb.N value.
Antioxidants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 16 
 
3.2. Aging Induced Oxidative Stress and Was Related to Bone Loss 
The results of the oxidative status revealed that the plasma MDA level was signiﬁ-
cantly higher in the aged mice compared to the young and adult mice ( p < 0.05; Figure 
2A). Additionally, the activities of plasma SOD and GPx were decreased in the aged mice 
relative to th ose in the young mice ( p < 0.05; Figure 2B,C). As shown in Figure 2D and 
Table S3, the correlations between the bone characteristics and oxidative status indicated 
that the plasma MDA level was negatively correlated with the tibia BV/TV, Tb.N, and 
Tb.Cd values, but was positively correlated with the tibia Tb.Sp value. Conversely, the 
plasma SOD activity exhibited a positive correlation with the tibia BV/TV and Tb.Cd val-
ues and a negative correlation with the tibia Tb.Sp value. Furthermore, the plasma GPx 
activity was positively correlated with the tibia Tb.N value. 
 
Figure 2. Age -induced bone loss was related to oxidative stress in mice. Plasma oxidative stress 
parameters of (A) malondialdehyde (MDA), (B) superoxide dismutase (SOD) and (C ) glutathione 
peroxidase (GPx). (D) Correlations between bone characteristics and plasma oxidative status. a,b Val-
ues (mean ± standard deviation; n  = 6) with diﬀerent letters represent statistical signiﬁcance at p < 
0.05. In this study, mice were categorized as young (8 weeks), adult (32 weeks) and aged (72 weeks). 
BV/TV, the ratio of bone volume to total volume; Tb.N, trabecular number; Tb.Sp, trabecular spaces; 
Tb.Th, trabecular thickness; Tb.Cd, trabecular connectivity density. 
3.3. MSM Supplementation Reversed Age-Related Bone Loss 
The aged mice treated with MSM exhibited no signiﬁcant eﬀects in terms of the body 
weight, feed intake, water consumption or survival proportions (Figure S1C–F). However, 
the MSM supplementation signiﬁcantly increased the max. load of the tibia (p < 0.05), 
which was accompanied by no diﬀerence  in the stiﬀness (Figure 3A,B). Additionally, 
drinking water containing MSM improved the BV/TV and Tb.Cd values in the proximal 
tibia (p < 0.05), although it did not aﬀect the Tb.N, Tb.Th, or Tb.Sp values in this trial 
(Figure 3D–H). In the cortical bone, the MSM treatment did not alter the Ct.Ar value (Fig-
ure 3I) but signiﬁcantly improved the Ct.Th and Ct.BMD value (p < 0.05; Figure 3J,K). 
Figure 2. Age-induced bone loss was related to oxidative stress in mice. Plasma oxidative stress
parameters of (A) malondialdehyde (MDA), (B) superoxide dismutase (SOD) and (C) glutathione per-
oxidase (GPx). (D) Correlations between bone characteristics and plasma oxidative status. a,b Values
(mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with different letters represent statistical significance atp < 0.05. In
this study, mice were categorized as young (8 weeks), adult (32 weeks) and aged (72 weeks). BV/TV ,
the ratio of bone volume to total volume; Tb.N, trabecular number; Tb.Sp, trabecular spaces; Tb.Th,
trabecular thickness; Tb.Cd, trabecular connectivity density.
3.3. MSM Supplementation Reversed Age-Related Bone Loss
The aged mice treated with MSM exhibited no significant effects in terms of the body
weight, feed intake, water consumption or survival proportions (Figure S1C–F). However,
the MSM supplementation significantly increased the max. load of the tibia ( p < 0.05),
which was accompanied by no difference in the stiffness (Figure 3A,B). Additionally,
drinking water containing MSM improved the BV/TV and Tb.Cd values in the proximal
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 7 of 16
tibia (p < 0.05), although it did not affect the Tb.N, Tb.Th, or Tb.Sp values in this trial
(Figure 3D–H). In the cortical bone, the MSM treatment did not alter the Ct.Ar value
(Figure 3I) but significantly improved the Ct.Th and Ct.BMD value (p < 0.05; Figure 3J,K).
Antioxidants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 16 
 
 
Figure 3. MSM supplementation improved tibia bone mass in aged mice. The mechanical properties 
were determined including (A) stiﬀness (the slope of the linear portion of the load–displacement 
curve) and (B ) the maximum force ( max. load, Newtons). Tibia was subjected to scan s using (C) 
µCT and bone mass was quantiﬁed, including (D) the ratio of bone volume to total volume (BV/TV), 
(E) trabecular number (Tb.N), (F) trabecular thickness (Tb.Th), (G) trabecular connectivity density 
(Tb.Cd), and (H) trabecular spaces (Tb.Sp). Tibia cortical bone parameters included (I) cortical area 
(Ct.Ar), (J) cortical thickness (Ct.Th), and ( K) cortical bone mineral density (Ct.BMD). a,b Values 
(mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with diﬀerent letters represent statistical signiﬁcance at p < 0.05. 
3.4. Improved Bone Mass by MSM Treatment Was Linked to Reduced Bone Resorption 
The MSM supplementation in the aged mice resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in the 
osteoclast frequency (TRAP-positive cells) observed in the bone sections (p < 0.05; Figure 
4A,B). Additionally, the aged mice treated with MSM exhibited a lower concentration of 
CTx, a marker of bone resorption, in the serum (p < 0.05; Figure 4C). Regarding osteoclas-
togenic factors, the mRNA expression of nuclear factor of activated T -cells, cytoplasmic, 
calcineurin dependent 1 ( NFATc1) and receptor activator of nuclear factor -κB ligand 
(RANKL) was signiﬁcantly downregulated in the MSM-treated aged mice, leading to a 
reduced RANKL/Osteoprotegerin (OPG) ratio in the tibia ( p < 0.05; Figure 4D). Further-
more, the MSM administration suppressed the expression of osteoclastic activity-related 
genes, including matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9) (p < 0.05; Figure 4D) and cathepsin K 
(Ctsk) (p = 0.053; Figure 4D), compared to the aged mice receiving water without MSM. 
For serum markers and genes related to bone formation, MSM supplementation showed 
a trend toward an increased serum OCN level (p = 0.079; Figure 4F) and runt related tran-
scription factor 2 (Runx2) mRNA abundance (p = 0.084; Figure 4G). Moreover, signiﬁcant 
increases were observed in osteocyte-related genes, including sclerostin ( Sost) and colla-
gen type I alpha 1 ( Col1a1), in MSM -treated aged mice compared to the untreated aged 
group (p < 0.05; Figure 4G). 
Figure 3. MSM supplementation improved tibia bone mass in aged mice. The mechanical properties
were determined including (A) stiffness (the slope of the linear portion of the load–displacement
curve) and (B) the maximum force (max. load, Newtons). Tibia was subjected to scans using (C) µCT
and bone mass was quantified, including ( D) the ratio of bone volume to total volume (BV/TV),
(E) trabecular number (Tb.N), (F) trabecular thickness (Tb.Th), (G) trabecular connectivity density
(Tb.Cd), and (H) trabecular spaces (Tb.Sp). Tibia cortical bone parameters included (I) cortical area
(Ct.Ar), (J) cortical thickness (Ct.Th), and ( K) cortical bone mineral density (Ct.BMD). a,b Values
(mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with different letters represent statistical significance at p < 0.05.
3.4. Improved Bone Mass by MSM Treatment Was Linked to Reduced Bone Resorption
The MSM supplementation in the aged mice resulted in a significant decrease in
the osteoclast frequency (TRAP-positive cells) observed in the bone sections ( p < 0.05;
Figure 4A,B). Additionally, the aged mice treated with MSM exhibited a lower concentra-
tion of CTx, a marker of bone resorption, in the serum ( p < 0.05; Figure 4C). Regarding
osteoclastogenic factors, the mRNA expression of nuclear factor of activated T-cells, cy-
toplasmic, calcineurin dependent 1 (NFATc1) and receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB
ligand (RANKL) was significantly downregulated in the MSM-treated aged mice, leading
to a reduced RANKL/Osteoprotegerin (OPG) ratio in the tibia (p < 0.05; Figure 4D). Further-
more, the MSM administration suppressed the expression of osteoclastic activity-related
genes, including matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9) (p < 0.05; Figure 4D) and cathepsin K
(Ctsk) (p = 0.053; Figure 4D), compared to the aged mice receiving water without MSM. For
serum markers and genes related to bone formation, MSM supplementation showed a trend
toward an increased serum OCN level (p = 0.079; Figure 4F) and runt related transcription
factor 2 (Runx2) mRNA abundance (p = 0.084; Figure 4G). Moreover, significant increases
were observed in osteocyte-related genes, including sclerostin (Sost) and collagen type I
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 8 of 16
alpha 1 (Col1a1), in MSM-treated aged mice compared to the untreated aged group (p < 0.05;
Figure 4G).
Antioxidants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 16 
 
 
Figure 4. The alterations of aged mice responses  to MSM supplementation in drinking water. (A ) 
Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining , in which the positive -TRAP cells (osteoclast) 
were indicated by the black arrow, and (B) the frequency of osteoclast s (N.Oc/B.Pm) were deter-
mined. (C) Serum C-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen (CTx) content reﬂects bone resorption. 
(D) The mRNA expression of genes related to bone resorption in tibia, including nuclear factor of 
activated T-cells, cytoplasmic, calcineurin dependent 1 (NFATc1), receptor activator of nuclear fac-
tor-κB ligand ( RANKL), osteoprotegerin ( OPG), cathepsin K ( Ctsk), matrix metallopeptidase 9 
(MMP9), and vacuolar-type H+-ATPase (V-ATPase). Serum bone formation biomarkers such as (E) 
N-terminal propeptide of procollagen type I (P1NP) and (F) osteocalcin (OCN). (G) The mRNA ex-
pression of genes related to bone formation in tibia, including runt related transcription factor 2 
(Runx2), Sp7 transcription factor 7 (Sp7), sclerostin (Sost), phosphate regulating endopeptidase hom-
olog x-linked (Phex), and collagen type I alpha 1 (Col1a1). a,b Values (mean ± standard deviation; n = 
6) with diﬀerent letters represent statistical signiﬁcance at p < 0.05. 
3.5. MSM Manipulation Promoted Antioxidative Capability in Aged Mice 
The effects of MSM supplementation on the antioxidative status are summarized in Table 
1 and Figure 5. While no significant changes were observed in the plasma MDA content or 
SOD activity, the MSM treatment significantly increased the GPx activity in the plasma of the 
aged mice (p < 0.05; Table 1). Additionally, the MSM supplementation elevated the GSH con-
tent (p < 0.05; Table 1) and showed a trend toward reducing the GSSG/GSH ratio in erythro-
cytes (p = 0.072; Table 1). In the bone marrow, the MSM supplementation increased the GPx 
activity and GSH content, and decreased the MDA level and the GSSG/GSH ratio (p < 0.05; 
Table 1). Regarding the expression of oxidative stress-related genes, the MSM treatment up-
regulated the mRNA expression of nuclear factor E2 related factor 2 (Nrf2) and GPx1 (p < 0.05; 
Figure 5A,F) and tended to increase the mRNA levels of SOD1 (p = 0.060; Figure 5C) and SOD2 
(p = 0.061; Figure 5C) in the bone marrow of the aged mice. However, the mRNA levels of 
heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1), catalase (CAT), and glutathione reductase (GR) in the bone marrow 
were not remarkably altered by the MSM addition (Figure 5B,D,E). 
Figure 4. The alterations of aged mice responses to MSM supplementation in drinking water.
(A) Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining, in which the positive-TRAP cells (osteoclast)
were indicated by the black arrow, and (B) the frequency of osteoclasts (N.Oc/B.Pm) were determined.
(C) Serum C-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen (CTx) content reflects bone resorption. (D) The
mRNA expression of genes related to bone resorption in tibia, including nuclear factor of activated
T-cells, cytoplasmic, calcineurin dependent 1 (NFATc1), receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB lig-
and (RANKL), osteoprotegerin (OPG), cathepsin K (Ctsk), matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9), and
vacuolar-type H+-ATPase (V-ATPase). Serum bone formation biomarkers such as ( E) N-terminal
propeptide of procollagen type I (P1NP) and (F) osteocalcin (OCN). (G) The mRNA expression of
genes related to bone formation in tibia, including runt related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), Sp7
transcription factor 7 (Sp7), sclerostin (Sost), phosphate regulating endopeptidase homolog x-linked
(Phex), and collagen type I alpha 1 ( Col1a1). a,b Values (mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with
different letters represent statistical significance at p < 0.05.
3.5. MSM Manipulation Promoted Antioxidative Capability in Aged Mice
The effects of MSM supplementation on the antioxidative status are summarized in
Table 1 and Figure 5. While no significant changes were observed in the plasma MDA
content or SOD activity, the MSM treatment significantly increased the GPx activity in
the plasma of the aged mice (p < 0.05; Table 1). Additionally, the MSM supplementation
elevated the GSH content ( p < 0.05; Table 1) and showed a trend toward reducing the
GSSG/GSH ratio in erythrocytes ( p = 0.072; Table 1). In the bone marrow, the MSM
supplementation increased the GPx activity and GSH content, and decreased the MDA
level and the GSSG/GSH ratio (p < 0.05; Table 1). Regarding the expression of oxidative
stress-related genes, the MSM treatment upregulated the mRNA expression of nuclear
factor E2 related factor 2 (Nrf2) and GPx1 (p < 0.05; Figure 5A,F) and tended to increase
the mRNA levels of SOD1 (p = 0.060; Figure 5C) and SOD2 (p = 0.061; Figure 5C) in the
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 9 of 16
bone marrow of the aged mice. However, the mRNA levels of heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1),
catalase (CAT), and glutathione reductase (GR) in the bone marrow were not remarkably
altered by the MSM addition (Figure 5B,D,E).
Table 1. Effects of MSM supplementation on antioxidative status in aged mice.
Items Aged Aged + MSM p-Value
Plasma
MDA (nmol/mL) 19.27 ± 2.62 17.74 ± 1.34 0.231
SOD (U/mL) 483.37 ± 75.54 565.25 ± 90.36 0.119
GPx (U/mL) 1.04 ± 0.12 b 1.19 ± 0.10 a 0.044
Erythrocytes
GSH (µmol/mL) 0.752 ± 0.173 b 1.017 ± 0.221 a 0.043
GSSG (µmol/mL) 0.013 ± 0.001 0.011 ± 0.006 0.599
GSSG/GSH 0.017 ± 0.002 0.011 ± 0.006 0.072
Bone marrow
MDA (nmol/g) 18.98 ± 2.03 a 16.19 ± 2.20 b 0.045
SOD (U/g) 14.24 ± 1.47 14.48 ± 2.87 0.857
GPx (U/g) 4.51 ± 0.64 b 5.47 ± 0.49 a 0.015
GSH (µmol/g) 1.215 ± 0.55 b 2.192 ± 0.314 a 0.004
GSSG (µmol/g) 0.032 ± 0.007 0.028 ± 0.013 0.502
GSSG/GSH 0.033 ± 0.018 a 0.013 ± 0.005 b 0.040
a,b Values (mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with different letters in the same row represent statistical significance
at p < 0.05. MDA, malondialdehyde; SOD, superoxide dismutase; GPx, glutathione peroxidase; GSH, glutathione;
GSSG, glutathione disulfide.
Antioxidants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 16 
 
Table 1. Eﬀects of MSM supplementation on antioxidative status in aged mice. 
Items Aged Aged + MSM p-Value 
Plasma 
MDA (nmol/mL) 19.27 ± 2.62 17.74 ± 1.34 0.231 
SOD (U/mL) 483.37 ± 75.54 565.25 ± 90.36 0.119 
GPx (U/mL) 1.04 ± 0.12 b 1.19 ± 0.10 a 0.044 
Erythrocytes 
GSH (µmol/mL) 0.752 ± 0.173 b 1.017 ± 0.221 a 0.043 
GSSG (µmol/mL) 0.013 ± 0.001 0.011 ± 0.006 0.599 
GSSG/GSH 0.017 ± 0.002 0.011 ± 0.006 0.072 
Bone marrow 
MDA (nmol/g) 18.98 ± 2.03 a 16.19 ± 2.20 b 0.045 
SOD (U/g) 14.24 ± 1.47 14.48 ± 2.87 0.857 
GPx (U/g) 4.51 ± 0.64 b 5.47 ± 0.49 a 0.015 
GSH (µmol/g) 1.215 ± 0.55 b 2.192 ± 0.314 a 0.004 
GSSG (µmol/g) 0.032 ± 0.007 0.028 ± 0.013 0.502 
GSSG/GSH 0.033 ± 0.018 a 0.013 ± 0.005 b 0.040 
a,b Values (mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with diﬀerent letters in the same row represent statis-
tical signiﬁcance at p < 0.05. MDA, malondialdehyde; SOD, superoxide dismutase; GPx, glutathione 
peroxidase; GSH, glutathione; GSSG, glutathione disulﬁde. 
 
Figure 5. Impacts of MSM supplementation on the mRNA expression of genes related to antioxida-
tive status in bone marrow. (A) Nuclear factor E2 related factor 2 (Nrf2), (B) heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1), 
(C) superoxide dismutase (SOD), (D) catalase (CAT), (E) glutathione reductase (GR), and (F) gluta-
thione peroxidase (GPx). a,b Values (mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with diﬀerent letters represent 
statistical signiﬁcance at p < 0.05. 
3.6. MSM InclusionReduced Inﬂammatory Status in Aged Mice 
As illustrated in Figure 6A,C, the MSM supplementation signiﬁcantly reduced the 
serum concentrations of pro- inﬂammatory cytokines IL-1β and TNF-α in the aged mice 
compared to the untreated aged group ( p < 0.05). However, no notable diﬀerences were 
observed in the serum levels of pro-inﬂammatory cytokine IL-6 or anti-inﬂammatory cy-
tokine IL-10 between the aged mice with and without the MSM treatment (Figure 6B,D). 
In addition, the mRNA expression of pro- inﬂammatory genes (Figure 6E), including 
Figure 5. Impacts of MSM supplementation on the mRNA expression of genes related to antiox-
idative status in bone marrow. ( A) Nuclear factor E2 related factor 2 ( Nrf2), (B) heme oxygenase
1 (HO-1), (C) superoxide dismutase (SOD), (D) catalase (CAT), (E) glutathione reductase (GR), and
(F) glutathione peroxidase (GPx). a,b Values (mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with different letters
represent statistical significance at p < 0.05.
3.6. MSM InclusionReduced Inflammatory Status in Aged Mice
As illustrated in Figure 6A,C, the MSM supplementation significantly reduced the
serum concentrations of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β and TNF-α in the aged mice
compared to the untreated aged group (p < 0.05). However, no notable differences were
observed in the serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 or anti-inflammatory
cytokine IL-10 between the aged mice with and without the MSM treatment (Figure 6B,D).
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 10 of 16
In addition, the mRNA expression of pro-inflammatory genes (Figure 6E), including nuclear
factor-kappa B (NF-κB), TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β, was downregulated to different extents in
response to the MSM supplementation in the aged mice.
Antioxidants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 16 
 
nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB), TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β, was downregulated to diﬀerent 
extents in response to the MSM supplementation in the aged mice. 
 
Figure 6. MSM supplementation in drinking water suppresses inﬂammatory response in aged mice. 
The concentrations of inﬂammatory cytokines such as (A) interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β), (B) interleukin-
6 (IL-6), (C) tumor necrosis factor -alpha (TNF-α), and (D) interleukin-10 (IL-10). (E) The mRNA 
expression of genes related to inﬂammation in bone marrow, including nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-
κB), IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α. a,b Values (mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with diﬀerent letters represent 
statistical signiﬁcance at p < 0.05. 
4. Discussion 
Age-related bone fragility is a signiﬁcant public health concern and is extensively 
studied, often linked to abnormal behavior and pain. In this study, we characterized 
changes in murine bone associated with natural aging, with a focus on alterations in the 
tibial microstructure. Age -induced bone loss was evident, consistent with bone -related 
diseases such as osteoporosis, which involve microstructural damage and reduced bone 
mass [1]. The aged mice demonstrated reduced bone formation, indicated by increas ed 
Tb.Sp and decreased BV/TV, Tb.N, Tb.Th, bone mineral content, and bone mineral density 
compared to the younger mice [24]. Notably, aging is frequently accompanied by oxida-
tive stress [3], suggesting a role for oxidative substances in bone loss. In this study, aged 
mice showed an elevated MDA level and reduced SOD and GPx activities in plasma, in-
dicating heightened oxidative stress. The correlation analysis revealed negative relation-
ships between the plasma MDA level and bone characteristics (BV/TV, Tb.N, and Tb.Cd) 
and positive correlations between the SOD/GPx activities and bone metrics. These ﬁnd-
ings confirmed that oxidative stress contributed to age-related bone loss. Supporting evidence 
has been reported showing that SOD1 or FoxO1,3,4 knockout mice exhibit increased ROS and 
reduced bone mass [7,25]. Additionally, the aging mice displayed decreased bone strength 
associated with elevated ROS and reduced GPx activity [8]. Importantly, antioxidant 
Figure 6. MSM supplementation in drinking water suppresses inflammatory response in aged mice.
The concentrations of inflammatory cytokines such as (A) interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β), (B) interleukin-6
(IL-6), ( C) tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF- α), and ( D) interleukin-10 (IL-10). ( E) The mRNA
expression of genes related to inflammation in bone marrow, including nuclear factor-kappa B
(NF-κB), IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α. a,b Values (mean ± standard deviation; n = 6) with different letters
represent statistical significance at p < 0.05.
4. Discussion
Age-related bone fragility is a significant public health concern and is extensively
studied, often linked to abnormal behavior and pain. In this study, we characterized
changes in murine bone associated with natural aging, with a focus on alterations in the
tibial microstructure. Age-induced bone loss was evident, consistent with bone-related
diseases such as osteoporosis, which involve microstructural damage and reduced bone
mass [1]. The aged mice demonstrated reduced bone formation, indicated by increased
Tb.Sp and decreased BV/TV , Tb.N, Tb.Th, bone mineral content, and bone mineral density
compared to the younger mice [24]. Notably, aging is frequently accompanied by oxidative
stress [3], suggesting a role for oxidative substances in bone loss. In this study, aged mice
showed an elevated MDA level and reduced SOD and GPx activities in plasma, indicat-
ing heightened oxidative stress. The correlation analysis revealed negative relationships
between the plasma MDA level and bone characteristics (BV/TV , Tb.N, and Tb.Cd) and
positive correlations between the SOD/GPx activities and bone metrics. These findings
confirmed that oxidative stress contributed to age-related bone loss. Supporting evidence
has been reported showing that SOD1 or FoxO1,3,4 knockout mice exhibit increased ROS
and reduced bone mass [ 7,25]. Additionally, the aging mice displayed decreased bone
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 11 of 16
strength associated with elevated ROS and reduced GPx activity [8]. Importantly, antioxi-
dant interventions such as vitamin C [26] and N-acetyl-L-cysteine [27] have been shown to
mitigate oxidative stress-induced bone loss, highlighting potential therapeutic strategies.
Given the detrimental effects of oxidative substances on bone mass, MSM, character-
ized by antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties [12,28], may mitigate age-induced
bone loss. To investigate this, tibial scans revealed that the MSM supplementation im-
proved the bone mass in the aged mice, as evidenced by increases in BV/TV , Tb.Cd, Ct.Th
and Ct.BMD. These improvements contributed to an enhanced tibial maximum load capac-
ity, aligning with the understanding that bone strength depends primarily on trabecular
microstructure and cortical composition [29]. Similar findings were reported in a previous
study, where MSM-treated aging mice showed an improved trabecular microstructure,
including increased BV/TV , Tb.Th, and Tb.N, along with decreased Tb.Sp [30]. Mechanisti-
cally, osteocytes, the predominant cell type in the mineralized bone matrix, form a complex
network that functions as the primary sensor of mechanical loads and a regulator of mineral
homeostasis [31,32]. Aging disrupted this network by reducing osteocyte numbers, increas-
ing senescent osteocytes, and impairing their ability to sense mechanical loads [32]. In this
study, the MSM treatment enhanced the mRNA expression of osteocyte-specific genes such
as Sost and Col1a1, further supporting the positive effects of MSM on bone health. Taken
together, these findings demonstrated that supplementation with 400 mg/kg/d MSM in
drinking water could effectively alleviate age-induced bone loss.
Bone quality is strongly influenced by the balance between bone formation and re-
sorption. Emerging evidence suggests that MSM enhances the mRNA expression of Runx2
in mesenchymal stem cells and stem cells derived from human exfoliated deciduous
teeth [15,16]. However, in this study, the inclusion of MSM in drinking water only slightly
increased the Runx2 mRNA expression and serum OCN level, a marker of bone formation,
in the aged mice. These findings indicate that MSM’s effect on bone formation in vivo
is limited. Nevertheless, in an aging mouse model, subcutaneous MSM-injected mice
(100 mg/kg body weight) presented an increase in the bone mass of the mandibular, which
was attributed to increased bone formation markers [ 30]. This implied that the roles of
MSM in age-related bone loss must be further evaluated in a future study. Regarding bone
resorption, the aged mice treated with MSM exhibited reduced osteoclast-mediated bone
resorption, as evidenced by the decreased serum CTx level, a marker of bone resorption.
This reduction was further supported by a lower number of osteoclasts (N.Oc/B.Pm) and
decreased activities of matrix-degrading enzymes, including matrix MMP9 and Ctsk, which
were secreted by osteoclasts to degrade the organic bone matrix [33]. It is well established
that osteoclastogenesis is driven by the interaction of RANKL with its receptor RANK,
leading to osteoclast differentiation [34]. The overexpression of RANKL accelerated os-
teoclastogenesis, resulting in osteoporosis, while RANKL deletion caused osteopetrosis
due to osteoclast deficiency [35,36]. OPG, an osteoclastogenesis inhibitory factor, binds to
RANKL and negatively regulates osteoclast differentiation [37]. Additionally, NFATc1, a
key transcription factor, is activated by RANKL-RANK binding, promoting the expression
of osteoclastic genes like MMP9 and Ctsk, thereby driving osteoclast differentiation [33]. In
the present study, MSM suppressed osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption by downregu-
lating the mRNA expression of NFATc1, RANKL, MMP9, and Ctsk, and the RANKL/OPG
ratio. These findings were consistent with the in vitro studies, which showed that MSM
inhibited RANKL-stimulated osteoclast differentiation in bone marrow macrophages by
suppressing the mRNA expression of NFATc1and Ctsk [38]. Overall, the results suggested
that MSM improved the bone mass in aged mice primarily by suppressing bone resorption
rather than enhancing bone formation.
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 12 of 16
To explore the potential mechanism by which MSM suppresses bone resorption, its
antioxidative capability is considered to be a key factor. ROS play a critical role in osteoclast
differentiation [39]. Excessive osteoclast activity may be mitigated by reducing intracellular
ROS production [40]. Given the link between diminished SOD and GPx activities and
bone loss in aged mice, the levels of these antioxidant enzymes were evaluated in this
study. Consistent with recent findings [41], the MSM supplementation did not alter the
plasma or bone marrow SOD activity in the aged mice. However, the reduction in the
MDA level in the bone marrow suggested an improved antioxidant status due to MSM,
likely mediated by increased GPx activity. GPx detoxifies hydrogen peroxide to water
using GSH as a substrate [ 42], while oxidized GSH (GSSG) is regenerated to GSH by
GR [43]. Thus, the redox balance, measured by GSH, GSSG, and their ratio, is a crucial
indicator of the antioxidant capacity. MSM metabolism supplies organic sulfur, a precursor
for GSH synthesis, counteracting GSH depletion [ 4]. In this study, MSM increased the
GSH and GPx levels, decreased the GSSG/GSH ratio, and enhanced the antioxidant status
of the aged mice. These results align with prior research in rats and broilers [ 28,41,44].
However, some studies have reported no improvement in the GSH level or GSSG/GSH
ratio with MSM supplementation [ 45,46], possibly due to differences in experimental
models, MSM dosage, or treatment duration. As far as the dose of MSM used in this study
(400 mg/kg/d) is concerned, there were multiple doses in previous studies to exert its
biological function, such as an oral gavage of 1500 mg/kg BW daily for 21 d, which did not
cause any adverse effects on growth or clinical outcomes and appeared to be absorbed and
distributed throughout the body [47], indicating the optimal dose of MSM for maximizing
bone mass required in the current study. Nrf2, a key transcription factor for oxidative stress
response, regulates the expression of cytoprotective and antioxidant enzymes, supporting
glutathione and thioredoxin systems to mitigate oxidative damage [ 48–50]. Moreover,
sulfonyl-containing compounds have been confirmed to be involved in the suppression of
the Keap1-Nrf2 interaction and activation of the Nrf2 pathway [51]. Herein, in this study,
the MSM treatment increased the mRNA expression ofNrf2 and GPx, as well as upregulated
SOD1 and SOD2 transcription in bone marrow, consistent with previous findings [17,52].
These findings suggested that MSM improved the bone mass in aged mice, primarily by
suppressing bone resorption, likely through its antioxidant properties.
The enhanced antioxidant defense induced by the Nrf2 pathway can suppress the
transcriptional activity of NF-κB, thereby mitigating the inflammatory response [50]. This
is particularly relevant in aging, as chronic inflammation impairs bone regeneration and
contributes to bone loss [53]. For example, TNF-α, secreted along with IL-1 by mononuclear
cells, indirectly promoted osteoclastogenesis by stimulating RANKL expression and facili-
tating the binding of RANKL to its receptor RANK on osteoclast precursors [54]. TNF-α
treatment significantly increased circulating osteoclast precursors, an effect reversed by
anti-TNF-α therapy in mice [55]. Similarly, IL-1β enhanced osteoclastogenesis by increasing
the RANKL mRNA level and the RANKL/OPG ratio [56]. Herein, upregulated RANKL ex-
pression could promote the activation of NF-κB and then stimulate the initial expression of
NFATc1, thereby enhancing osteoclastogenesis [33]. Previous studies have shown that MSM
reduced inflammatory responses by decreasing the TNF-α expression in LPS-stimulated
RAW264.7 cells [13], and attenuating TNF- α-induced inflammation in cardiac cells [ 46].
MSM administration has also been demonstrated to suppress the transcriptional expres-
sion of IL-1β [57] and mitigate the adverse effects of IL-1β on cell viability via the NF-κB
signaling pathway [58]. In the present study, MSM supplementation effectively reduced
inflammatory responses in aged mice. This was manifested by decreased serum levels
of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including TNF- α and IL-1β, as well as downregulated
mRNA expression of TNF-α, IL-1β and NF-κB in bone marrow. These results suggested that
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 13 of 16
MSM supplementation in drinking water inhibited the RANKL/NF-κB/NFATc1 signaling
pathway, thereby suppressing osteoclast differentiation, consistent with findings from a
previous study [38].
5. Conclusions
In conclusion, a limitation of this study was the age categorization of the mice, defined
as young (8 weeks), adult (32 weeks) and aged (72 weeks). It is well established that bone
formation and resorption dynamics vary significantly across different life stages. Herein,
including a second group of younger aged mice (50–60 weeks old) in the study would
make the findings more convincing, as this may better demonstrate the role of MSM and
provide evidence that its preventive effects on bone loss precede clinical symptoms, rather
than serving solely as a treatment for age-related bone loss. In addition, the age-related loss
of bone mass and strength is a common skeletal feature influenced by multiple factors, in-
cluding hormonal changes (e.g., estrogen deficiency), nutritional deficiencies (e.g., calcium
and vitamin D), increased oxidative stress from ROS and reduced physical activity [ 59].
Notably, estrogen plays a crucial role in bone homeostasis by inhibiting osteoclast activity
and promoting osteoblast survival. In females, estrogen decline (e.g., postmenopause) leads
to increased bone resorption, making them more susceptible to osteoporosis and bone loss.
Additionally, males typically have greater muscle mass and higher mechanical loading
on bones, which enhances the bone density through mechanotransduction. Therefore, sex
differences should be considered, and further studies are needed to clarify the role of MSM
in female models. This study primarily investigated the relationship between age-induced
bone loss and oxidative stress using correlation analysis and MSM supplementation. While
the findings confirmed a significant link between oxidative stress and bone loss, further
studies are necessary to elucidate the underlying mechanisms. Within these limitations, we
demonstrated that the MSM supplementation effectively improved the bone mass in the
aged mice, primarily by regulating bone resorption. The antioxidant properties of MSM
likely played a key role in this suppression of bone resorption.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at https://
www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/antiox14020216/s1, Table S1: Composition and calculated nutrient
content (as-fed basis); Table S2: Primers for quantitative real-time PCR; Table S3: Correlations between
bone characteristics and oxidative status; Figure S1: Chemical structure of methyl sulfonyl methane
(MSM) and the experimental design used to explore the effects of MSM on the growth of mice.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.Z., H.Z. and L.Z.; methodology, D.Z., L.W. and L.T.;
software, H.Z. and L.T.; validation, L.T.; formal analysis, Y.Z. and L.T.; investigation, D.Z., L.W., Y.Z.
and H.Z.; resources, L.Z.; data curation, H.Z. and L.Z.; writing—original draft preparation, D.Z. and
L.W.; writing—review and editing, H.Z. and L.Z.; visualization, L.W. and L.T.; supervision, H.Z. and
L.Z.; project administration, H.Z. and L.Z.; funding acquisition, H.Z. and L.Z. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Sichuan Provincial Science and Technology Project for
research and application of theoretical model of pilot health and behavioral safety assurance in
complex flight scenarios (2024JDHJ0015) and the Projects of International Cooperation of Henan
Province (232102520016).
Institutional Review Board Statement: All procedures adhered to the ethical guidelines of the Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee of Henan Agricultural University (Approval No. HNND2021-12).
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Data will be made available on request.
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 14 of 16
Acknowledgments: The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Institute of High-Altitude
Behavior Science, Civil Aviation Flight University of China and the guidelines for antioxidative
analysis and µCT scanning from Laboratory for Animal Nutrition and Animal Product Quality,
Ghent University.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Armas, L.A.; Recker, R.R. Pathophysiology of osteoporosis: New mechanistic insights. Endocrinol. Metab. Cli. N. Am. 2012,
41, 475–486. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Guo, J.; Huang, X.; Dou, L.; Yan, M.; Shen, T.; Tang, W.; Li, J. Aging and aging-related diseases: From molecular mechanisms to
interventions and treatments. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther.2022, 7, 391. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Liguori, I.; Russo, G.; Curcio, F.; Bulli, G.; Aran, L.; Della-Morte, D.; Gargiulo, G.; Testa, G.; Cacciatore, F.; Bonaduce, D.; et al.
Oxidative stress, aging, and diseases. Clin. Interv. Aging 2018, 13, 757–772. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Warraich, U.E.; Hussain, F.; Kayani, H.U.R. Aging—Oxidative stress, antioxidants and computational modeling.Heliyon 2020,
6, e04107. [CrossRef]
5. Bai, X.C.; Lu, D.; Bai, J.; Zheng, H.; Ke, Z.Y.; Li, X.M.; Luo, S.Q. Oxidative stress inhibits osteoblastic differentiation of bone cells
by ERK and NF-kappaB. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2004, 314, 197–207. [CrossRef]
6. Rached, M.T.; Kode, A.; Xu, L.; Yoshikawa, Y.; Paik, J.H.; Depinho, R.A.; Kousteni, S. FoxO1 is a positive regulator of bone
formation by favoring protein synthesis and resistance to oxidative stress in osteoblasts. Cell Metab. 2010, 11, 147–160. [CrossRef]
7. Nojiri, H.; Saita, Y.; Morikawa, D.; Kobayashi, K.; Tsuda, C.; Miyazaki, T.; Saito, M.; Marumo, K.; Yonezawa, I.; Kaneko, K.; et al.
Cytoplasmic superoxide causes bone fragility owing to low-turnover osteoporosis and impaired collagen cross-linking. J. Bone
Miner. Res. 2011, 26, 2682–2694. [CrossRef]
8. Almeida, M.; Han, L.; Martin-Millan, M.; Plotkin, L.I.; Stewart, S.A.; Roberson, P .K.; Kousteni, S.; O’Brien, C.A.; Bellido, T.; Parfitt,
A.M.; et al. Skeletal involution by age-associated oxidative stress and its acceleration by loss of sex steroids. J. Biol. Chem. 2007,
282, 27285–27297. [CrossRef]
9. Lin, A.; Nguy, C.H.; Shic, F.; Ross, B.D. Accumulation of methylsulfonylmethane in the human brain: Identification by multinu-
clear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. Toxicol. Lett. 2001, 123, 169–177. [CrossRef]
10. Wong, T.; Bloomer, R.J.; Benjamin, R.L.; Buddington, R.K. Small Intestinal Absorption of Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) and
Accumulation of the Sulfur Moiety in Selected Tissues of Mice. Nutrients 2017, 10, 19. [CrossRef]
11. Magnuson, B.A.; Appleton, J.; Ames, G.B. Pharmacokinetics and distribution of [35S] methylsulfonylmethane following oral
administration to rats. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2007, 55, 1033–1038. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Butawan, M.; Benjamin, R.L.; Bloomer, R.J. Methylsulfonylmethane: Applications and Safety of a Novel Dietary Supplement.
Nutrients 2017, 9, 290. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Kim, Y.H.; Kim, D.H.; Lim, H.; Baek, D.Y.; Shin, H.K.; Kim, J.K. The anti-inflammatory effects of methylsulfonylmethane on
lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammatory responses in murine macrophages. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 2009, 32, 651–656. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
14. Mohammadi, S.; Najafi, M.; Hamzeiy, H.; Maleki-Dizaji, N.; Pezeshkian, M.; Sadeghi-Bazargani, H.; Darabi, M.; Mostafalou, S.;
Bohlooli, S.; Garjani, A. Protective effects of methylsulfonylmethane on hemodynamics and oxidative stress in monocrotaline-
induced pulmonary hypertensive rats. Adv. Pharmacol. Sci. 2012, 2012, 507278. [CrossRef]
15. Kim, D.N.; Joung, Y.H.; Darvin, P .; Kang, D.Y.; Sp, N.; Byun, H.J.; Cho, K.H.; Park, K.D.; Lee, H.K.; Yang, Y.M. Methylsulfonyl-
methane enhances BMP-2-induced osteoblast differentiation in mesenchymal stem cells. Mol. Med. Rep. 2016, 14, 460–466.
[CrossRef]
16. Aljohani, H.; Senbanjo, L.T.; Chellaiah, M.A. Methylsulfonylmethane increases osteogenesis and regulates the mineralization of
the matrix by transglutaminase 2 in SHED cells. PLoS ONE 2019, 14, e0225598. [CrossRef]
17. Amirshahrokhi, K.; Niapour, A. Methylsulfonylmethane protects against ethanol-induced brain injury in mice through the
inhibition of oxidative stress, proinflammatory mediators and apoptotic cell death. Int. Immunopharmacol. 2022, 106, 108638.
[CrossRef]
18. Masschaele, B.C.; Cnudde, V .; Dierick, M.; Jacobs, P .; Van Hoorebeke, L.; Vlassenbroeck, J. UGCT: New x-ray radiography and
tomography facility. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A. 2007, 580, 266–269. [CrossRef]
19. Zhang, H.; Majdeddin, M.; Gaublomme, D.; Taminiau, B.; Boone, M.; Elewaut, D.; Daube, G.; Josipovic, I.; Zhang, K.; Michiels, J.
25-hydroxycholecalciferol reverses heat induced alterations in bone quality in finisher broilers associated with effects on intestinal
integrity and inflammation. J. Anim. Sci. Biotechnol. 2021, 12, 104. [CrossRef]
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 15 of 16
20. Grotto, D.; Santa Maria, L.D.; Boeira, S.; Valentini, J.; Charão, M.F.; Moro, A.M.; Nascimento, P .C.; Pomblum, V .J.; Garcia, S.C.
Rapid quantification of malondialdehyde in plasma by high performance liquid chromatography-visible detection. J. Pharm.
Biomed. Anal. 2007, 43, 619–624. [CrossRef]
21. Hernández, P .; Zomeño, L.; Ariño, B.; Blasco, A. Antioxidant, lipolytic and proteolytic enzyme activities in pork meat from
different genotypes. Meat Sci. 2004, 66, 525–529. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Degroote, J.; Vergauwen, H.; Wang, W.; Van Ginneken, C.; De Smet, S.; Michiels, J. Changes of the glutathione redox system
during the weaning transition in piglets, in relation to small intestinal morphology and barrier function. J. Anim. Sci. Biotechnol.
2020, 11, 45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Vandesompele, J.; De Preter, K.; Pattyn, F.; Poppe, B.; Van Roy, N.; De Paepe, A.; Speleman, F. Accurate normalization of real-time
quantitative RT-PCR data by geometric averaging of multiple internal control genes. Genome Boil. 2002, 3, 1–11. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
24. Lopas, L.A.; Belkin, N.S.; Mutyaba, P .L.; Gray, C.F.; Hankenson, K.D.; Ahn, J. Fractures in geriatric mice show decreased callus
expansion and bone volume. Clin. Orthop. Relat. Res. 2014, 472, 3523–3532. [CrossRef]
25. Ambrogini, E.; Almeida, M.; Martin-Millan, M.; Paik, J.H.; Depinho, R.A.; Han, L.; Goellner, J.; Weinstein, R.S.; Jilka, R.L.; O’Brien,
C.A.; et al. FoxO-mediated defense against oxidative stress in osteoblasts is indispensable for skeletal homeostasis in mice. Cell
Metab. 2010, 11, 136–146. [CrossRef]
26. Aghajanian, P .; Hall, S.; Wongworawat, M.D.; Mohan, S. The roles and mechanisms of actions of vitamin C in bone: New
developments. J. Bone Miner Res. 2015, 30, 1945–1955. [CrossRef]
27. Zhang, H.; Pertiwi, H.; Michiels, J.; Gaublomme, D.; Majdeddin, M.; Hou, Y.; Boone, M.; Elewaut, D.; Josipovic, I.; Degroote, J.
Improvement of antioxidant capability by dietary N-acetyl cysteine supplementation alleviates bone loss induced by chronic heat
stress in finisher broilers. J. Anim. Sci. Biotechnol. 2024, 15, 158. [CrossRef]
28. Rasheed, M.S.A.; Oelschlager, M.L.; Smith, B.N.; Bauer, L.L.; Whelan, R.A.; Dilger, R.N. Dietary methylsulfonylmethane
supplementation and oxidative stress in broiler chickens. Poult. Sci. 2020, 99, 914–925. [CrossRef]
29. Ito, M.; Nishida, A.; Koga, A.; Ikeda, S.; Shiraishi, A.; Uetani, M.; Hayashi, K.; Nakamura, T. Contribution of trabecular and
cortical components to the mechanical properties of bone and their regulating parameters. Bone 2002, 31, 351–358. [CrossRef]
30. Aljohani, H.; Senbanjo, L.T.; Al Qranei, M.; Stains, J.P .; Chellaiah, M.A. Methylsulfonylmethane Increases the Alveolar Bone
Density of Mandibles in Aging Female Mice. Front. Physiol. 2021, 12, 708905. [CrossRef]
31. Schaffler, M.B.; Kennedy, O.D. Osteocyte signalling in bone. Curr. Osteoporos. Rep. 2012, 10, 118–125. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Zhang, L.; Guan, Q.; Wang, Z.; Feng, J.; Zou, J.; Gao, B. Consequences of Aging on Bone. Aging Dis. 2023, 15, 2417–2452.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Quan, G.H.; Wang, H.; Cao, J.; Zhang, Y.; Wu, D.; Peng, Q.; Liu, N.; Sun, W.C. Calycosin Suppresses RANKL-Mediated
Osteoclastogenesis through Inhibition of MAPKs and NF-κB. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2015, 16, 29496–29507. [CrossRef]
34. Chen, X.; Wang, Z.; Duan, N.; Zhu, G.; Schwarz, E.M.; Xie, C. Osteoblast-osteoclast interactions. Connect. Tissue Res. 2018,
59, 99–107. [CrossRef]
35. Kong, Y.Y.; Yoshida, H.; Sarosi, I.; Tan, H.L.; Timms, E.; Capparelli, C.; Morony, S.; Oliveira-dos-Santos, A.J.; Van, G.; Itie, A.;
et al. OPGL is a key regulator of osteoclastogenesis, lymphocyte development and lymph-node organogenesis. Nature 1999,
397, 315–323. [CrossRef]
36. Mizuno, A.; Kanno, T.; Hoshi, M.; Shibata, O.; Yano, K.; Fujise, N.; Kinosaki, M.; Yamaguchi, K.; Tsuda, E.; Murakami, A.; et al.
Transgenic mice overexpressing soluble osteoclast differentiation factor (sODF) exhibit severe osteoporosis. J. Bone Miner. Metab.
2002, 20, 337–344. [CrossRef]
37. Kim, J.M.; Lin, C.; Stavre, Z.; Greenblatt, M.B.; Shim, J.H. Osteoblast-osteoclast communication and bone homeostasis. Cells 2020,
9, 2073. [CrossRef]
38. Joung, Y.H.; Darvin, P .; Kang, D.Y.; Sp, N.; Byun, H.J.; Lee, C.H.; Lee, H.K.; Yang, Y.M. Methylsulfonylmethane inhibits RANKL-
Induced osteoclastogenesis in BMMs by suppressing NF-κB and STAT3 activities. PLoS ONE 2016, 11, e0159891. [CrossRef]
39. Schröder, K. NADPH oxidases in bone homeostasis and osteoporosis. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2019, 132, 67–72. [CrossRef]
40. Ohyama, Y.; Ito, J.; Kitano, V .J.; Shimada, J.; Hakeda, Y. The polymethoxy flavonoid sudachitin suppresses inflammatory
bone destruction by directly inhibiting osteoclastogenesis due to reduced ROS production and MAPK activation in osteoclast
precursors. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0191192. [CrossRef]
41. Zhang, H.; Majdeddin, M.; Degroote, J.; Van Liefferinge, E.; Van Noten, N.; Van Kerschaver, C.; Vandaele, M.; Cesar De Paula
Dorigam, J.; Michiels, J. Effect of supplemental methyl sulfonyl methane on performance, carcass and meat quality and oxidative
status in chronic cyclic heat-stressed finishing broilers. Poult. Sci. 2023, 102, 102321. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Peter, S.F. Antioxidant Systems in Poultry Biology: Superoxide Dismutase. J. Anim. Res. Nutr. 2016, 1, 8.
43. Robaczewska, J.; Kedziora-Kornatowska, K.; Kozakiewicz, M.; Zary-Sikorska, E.; Pawluk, H.; Pawliszak, W.; Kedziora, J. Role
of glutathione metabolism and glutathione-related antioxidant defense systems in hypertension. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 2016,
67, 331–337. [PubMed]
Antioxidants 2025, 14, 216 16 of 16
44. Yan, H.L.; Cao, S.C.; Hu, Y.D.; Zhang, H.F.; Liu, J.B. Effects of methylsulfonylmethane on growth performance, immunity,
antioxidant capacity, and meat quality in Pekin ducks. Poult. Sci. 2020, 99, 1069–1074. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Nakhostin-Roohi, B.; Niknam, Z.; Vaezi, N.; Mohammadi, S.; Bohlooli, S. Effect of single dose administration of methylsulfonyl-
methane on oxidative stress following acute exhaustive exercise. Iran. J. Pharm. Res. 2013, 12, 845–853.
46. Miller, L.E. Methylsulfonylmethane decreases inflammatory response to tumor necrosis factor-α in cardiac cells. Am. J. Cardiovasc.
Dis. 2018, 8, 31–38.
47. Abdul Rasheed, M.S.; Oelschlager, M.L.; Smith, B.N.; Bauer, L.L.; Whelan, R.A.; Dilger, R.N. Toxicity and tissue distribution of
methylsulfonylmethane following oral gavage in broilers. Poult. Sci. 2019, 98, 4972–4981. [CrossRef]
48. Jaganjac, M.; Milkovic, L.; Sunjic, S.B.; Zarkovic, N. The NRF2, Thioredoxin, and Glutathione System in Tumorigenesis and
Anticancer Therapies. Antioxidants 2020, 9, 1151. [CrossRef]
49. Bauer, M.; Bauer, I. Heme oxygenase-1: Redox regulation and role in the hepatic response to oxidative stress. Antioxid. Redox
Signal. 2002, 4, 749–758. [CrossRef]
50. Ganesh Yerra, V .; Negi, G.; Sharma, S.S.; Kumar, A. Potential therapeutic effects of the simultaneous targeting of the Nrf2 and
NF-κB pathways in diabetic neuropathy. Redox Biol. 2013, 1, 394–397. [CrossRef]
51. Egbujor, M.C.; Petrosino, M.; Zuhra, K.; Saso, L. The Role of Organosulfur Compounds as Nrf2 Activators and Their Antioxidant
Effects. Antioxidants 2022, 11, 1255. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Kim, S.H.; Smith, A.J.; Tan, J.; Shytle, R.D.; Giunta, B. MSM ameliorates HIV-1 Tat induced neuronal oxidative stress via rebalance
of the glutathione cycle. Am. J. Transl. Res. 2015, 7, 328–338. [PubMed]
53. Kushioka, J.; Chow, S.K.; Toya, M.; Tsubosaka, M.; Shen, H.; Gao, Q.; Li, X.; Zhang, N.; Goodman, S.B. Bone regeneration in
inflammation with aging and cell-based immunomodulatory therapy. Inflamm. Regen. 2023, 43, 29. [CrossRef]
54. Wu, Y.; Yang, Y.; Wang, L.; Chen, Y.; Han, X.; Sun, L.; Chen, H.; Chen, Q. Effect of Bifidobacterium on osteoclasts: TNF-α/NF-κB
inflammatory signal pathway-mediated mechanism. Front. Endocrinol. 2023, 14, 1109296. [CrossRef]
55. Li, P .; Schwarz, E.M.; O’Keefe, R.J.; Ma, L.; Looney, R.J.; Ritchlin, C.T.; Boyce, B.F.; Xing, L. Systemic tumor necrosis factor alpha
mediates an increase in peripheral CD11bhigh osteoclast precursors in tumor necrosis factor alpha-transgenic mice. Arthritis
Rheum. 2004, 50, 265–276. [CrossRef]
56. Huynh, N.C.; Everts, V .; Pavasant, P .; Ampornaramveth, R.S. Interleukin-1β induces human cementoblasts to support osteoclasto-
genesis. Int. J. Oral. Sci. 2017, 9, e5. [CrossRef]
57. Ahn, H.; Kim, J.; Lee, M.J.; Kim, Y.J.; Cho, Y.W.; Lee, G.S. Methylsulfonylmethane inhibits NLRP3 inflammasome activation.
Cytokine 2015, 71, 223–231. [CrossRef]
58. Cheleschi, S.; Fioravanti, A.; De Palma, A.; Corallo, C.; Franci, D.; Volpi, N.; Bedogni, G.; Giannotti, S.; Giordano, N. Methylsul-
fonylmethane and mobilee prevent negative effect of IL-1β in human chondrocyte cultures via NF-κB signaling pathway. Int.
Immunopharmacol. 2018, 65, 129–139. [CrossRef]
59. Khosla, S. Pathogenesis of age-related bone loss in humans. J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 2013, 68, 1226–1235. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.