ORIGINAL ARTICLE
N-acetylcysteine treatment ameliorates the skeletal
phenotype of a mouse model of diastrophic dysplasia
Luca Monti1, Chiara Paganini 1, Silvia Lecci 1, Fabio De Leonardis 1, Eric Hay 3,
Martine Cohen-Solal3, Simona Villani 2, Andrea Superti-Furga 4,
Ruggero Tenni1, Antonella Forlino 1 and Antonio Rossi 1,*
1Department of Molecular Medicine, Unit of Biochemistry and 2Department of Public Health, Experimental and
Forensic Medicine, Unit of Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy, 3Inserm
U1132 and University Paris 7, Hopital Lariboisiere, 75010 Paris, France and 4Department of Pediatrics, Lausanne
University Hospital, University of Lausanne, Lausanne 1011, Switzerland
*To whom correspondence should be addressed at: Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare, Unità di Biochimica ‘Alessandro Castellani’, Via Taramelli, 3/B,
I-27100 Pavia, Italy. Tel: +39 0382987229; Fax: +39 0382423108; Email: antrossi@unipv.it
Abstract
Diastrophic dysplasia (DTD) is a recessive chondrodysplasia caused by mutations in SLC26A2, a cell membrane sulfate–chloride
antiporter. Sulfate uptake impairment results in low cytosolic sulfate, leading to cartilage proteoglycan (PG) undersulfation. In
this work, we used the dtd mouse model to study the role of N-acetyl--cysteine (NAC), a well-known drug with antioxidant
properties, as an intracellular sulfate source for macromolecular sulfation. Because of the important pre-natal phase of skeletal
development and growth, we administered 30 g/l NAC in the drinking water to pregnant mice to explore a possible
transplacental effect on the fetuses. When cartilage PG sulfation was evaluated by high-performance liquid chromatography
disaccharide analysis in dtd newborn mice, a marked increase in PG sulfation was observed in newborns from NAC-treated
pregnancies when compared with the placebo group. Morphometric studies of the femur, tibia and ilium after skeletal staining
with alcian blue and alizarin red indicated a partial rescue of abnormal bone morphology in dtd newborns from treated females,
compared with pups from untreated females. The bene ﬁcial effect of increased macromolecular sulfation was con ﬁrmed by
chondrocyte proliferation studies in cryosections of the tibial epiphysis by proliferating cell nuclear antigen
immunohistochemistry: the percentage of proliferating cells, signiﬁcantly reduced in the placebo group, reached normal values
in dtd newborns from NAC-treated females. In conclusion, NAC is a useful source of sulfate for macromolecular sulfationin vivo
when extracellular sulfate supply is reduced, con ﬁrming the potential of therapeutic approaches with thiol compounds to
improve skeletal deformity and short stature in human DTD and related disorders.
Introduction
The diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (DTDST, also known
as SLC26A2) is a sulfate –chloride antiporter expressed in a wide
range of tissues, which allows recruitment of sulfate from the
extracellular space into the cytoplasm (1). Functional impairment
of SLC26A2 causes reduced sulfate uptake leading to low levels of
intracellular sulfate, particularly in cells with a high synthetic
requirement of sulfate (2). A reduction in the intracellular sulfate
pool causes the synthesis and secretion of undersulfated proteo-
glycans (PGs), and this in turn affects the composition, architec-
ture, signaling and mechanical properties of the extracellular
matrix ( 3,4). As the cartilage extracellular matrix contains high
amount of sulfated PGs, the main consequences of PG undersulfa-
tion affect cartilage development, homeostasis and structure,
Received: December 22, 2014. Revised and Accepted: July 15, 2015
© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
Human Molecular Genetics , 2015, Vol. 24, No. 19 5570 –5580
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv289
Advance Access Publication Date: 23 July 2015
Original Article
5570
 at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries on October 8, 2015http://hmg.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
resulting in the onset of chondrodysplastic phenotypes. Thus,
mutations in the SLC26A2 gene cause a family of recessive osteo-
chondrodysplasias which include, in the order of decreasing
severity, achondrogenesis type 1B (ACG1B, MIM no. 600972),
atelosteogenesis type 2 (AO2, MIM no. 256050), DTD (MIM no.
222600) and recessive multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (EDM4, MIM
no. 226900). The different clinical phenotypes are related to the
residual function of the sulfate transporter and, consequently, to
the level of PG undersulfation in patients’cartilage (2,5,6).
DTD is a non-lethal skeletal dysplasia, ﬁrst described by Lamy
and Maroteaux ( 7) in 1960, characterized by growth retardation,
skeletal dysplasia, progressive kyphoscoliosis of the spine, typ-
ical hand and foot deformities, joint contractures and reduced
viability ( 8). DTD patients have marked physical dif ﬁculties that
affect common activities of daily living, their work activities, par-
ticipation in society and their ﬁnancial situation; all these dif ﬁ-
culties and the lack of a decisive non-invasive therapy seriously
worsen the quality of life of the patients (9). Currently, no decisive
therapies are available for DTD as well as for most skeletal disor-
ders; patients are treated mainly by orthopedic interventions and
physiotherapy in order to reduce skeletal deformities and to
maintain articular mobility ( 10,11).
We demonstrated previously a correlation between PG under-
sulfation and the severity of the clinical phenotypes of SLC26A2-
related disorders ( 2). A lower level of PG undersulfation and a
less-compromised sulfate transporter function detected in
SLC26A2 patients ’cartilage and ﬁbroblasts are associated with
less severe clinical phenotypes ( 2). These ﬁndings suggest that
increasing PG sulfation in the cartilage of DTD patients might
result in an amelioration of the clinical phenotype.
Studies performed in vitro and in vivo have pointed out the
potential relevance of sulfur-containing amino acids and their
derivatives, such as N-acetyl- -cysteine (NAC; C 5H9NO3S, Pub-
Chem Compound CID 12035), as sources of intracellular sulfate,
through their catabolism, when extracellular sulfate concentra-
tion is low or when its uptake is impaired such as in SLC26A2-re-
lated chondrodysplasias ( 12–14). In particular, NAC has been
proposed as an alternative sulfation source as cysteine is poorly
soluble, its sulfhydryl group easily oxidizes and its concentration
is tightly regulated by the liver in order to keep its intracellular
concentration below the threshold of cytotoxicity ( 15). NAC is a
FDA-approved drug largely used in clinics with minimal side ef-
fects. This drug was ﬁrst reported to have clinical bene ﬁts in the
early 1960s, when it was used as an effective mucolytic agent in
patients with cystic ﬁbrosis through the reduction of disul ﬁde
bonds in glycoproteins of the mucus ( 16). Then it has been used
in several disorders with different etiologies such as paracetamol
(acetaminophen) overdose, pulmonary ﬁbrosis, nephropathy,
cardiovascular disease, diabetes and cancer (17). Furthermore,
NAC protects cells from oxidative stress through its ability to
bind free radicals, such as the hydroxyl radical and H 2O2 (18).
Moreover, NAC metabolism to cysteine allows the maintenance
of an adequate intracellular concentration of glutathione, the
main antioxidant molecule in cells ( 19). Due to its antioxidant
properties, NAC is also used in neurodegenerative diseases ( 20).
Some years ago, we generated a mouse model of DTD (dtd
mouse) by knocking in the Slc26a2 mouse gene a mutation previ-
ously identi ﬁed in a DTD patient ( 21). The dtd mouse shows
growth retardation and reduced bone growth, shortening of the
long bones, thoracic kyphosis causing deformities of the rib cage
with reduced volume and hip dysplasia, thereby recapitulating es-
sential aspects of the DTD phenotype in humans ( 21). Reduced
sulfate uptake was demonstrated in chondrocyte, osteoblast and
ﬁbroblast cultures, and sulfation studies revealed undersulfation
of chondroitin sulfate PGs in cartilage and bone. The phenotypic
similarities between mutant mice and human DTD make this
mouse strain a good model for the study of SLC26A2-related disor-
ders and a useful tool to develop new treatments and test candi-
date pharmacological compounds.
We already assessed the potential value of NAC to ameliorate
cartilage PG sulfation in dtd micein vivo (14). In that work, newborn
dtd mice were treated for 1 week with daily hypodermic injections
of NAC, and then cartilage PG sulfation was measured in the cartil-
age from treated mice versus the placebo group. A mild but signiﬁ-
cant increase in PG sulfation was observed in dtd mice treated with
NAC due to its catabolism. Pharmacokinetic experiments showed
that NAC was rapidly removed from the bloodstream within 8 h
and that this rapid removal may be a hindrance to its pharmaco-
logical effects on the correction of macromolecular sulfation ( 14).
These results suggest that NAC ef ﬁcacy might be even higher if
the drug concentration in the plasma would be more constant.
On the basis of these observations, in this work we evaluated
the contribution of NAC as a potential intracellular sulfate source
for cartilage PG sulfation, as well as its ability to ameliorate the
skeletal phenotype of dtd mice by administering NAC in the drink-
ing water to pregnant mice from 0.5 day post-coitum until delivery.
Once demonstrated that NAC given to pregnant mice crosses the
placenta, we characterized the phenotype of newborns from trea-
ted mice by cartilage PG sulfation, morphological studies of the
skeleton by differential staining with alcian blue and alizarin red
and by radiography and chondrocyte proliferation by immunohis-
tochemistry. Experimental data demonstrated that the cartilage PG
sulfation increase in dtd fetuses treated with the drug resulted in
an amelioration of long bone morphology and cartilage histology.
Results
NAC enters the bloodstream of pregnant mice
and by placental transfer reaches fetuses
Pregnant wild-type mice were treated for the whole pregnancy
with free access to 30 g/l NAC, pH 7.0 –7.4, in place of drinking
water used in the placebo group. To evaluate NAC intestinal ab-
sorption, the plasma NAC concentration was measured at the
17th day of pregnancy by reverse-phase high-performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) after pre-column ﬂuorescence derivati-
zation using 7- ﬂuorobenzo-2-oxa-1,3-diazole-4-sulfonic acid
ammonium salt (SBD-F) (Supplementary Material, Fig. S1). A con-
centration of 1.0 ± 0.6 µg NAC/ml plasma ( n = 5) was detected in
treated females, indicating that the drug administered orally was
absorbed in the intestine. In the same animals, NAC placental
transfer to fetuses was demonstrated: a concentration of 0.7 ± 0.3 µg
NAC/g of fetus weight ( n = 16) was detected in homogenates of
fetuses from treated pregnant females. Overall, these data indi-
cated that NAC given orally to pregnant mice can cross placenta
and reaches fetuses; conversely, NAC was not detected in fetus
homogenates from untreated pregnant mice, as already observed
in plasma from untreated pregnant mice.
NAC increases sulfation of cartilage PGs in newborn
dtd mice
To assess the effect of NAC treatment on macromolecular sulfa-
tion in newborn dtd and wild-type mice, heterozygous females
were mated to heterozygous males and pregnant animals were
treated for the whole pregnancy with 30 g/l NAC in the drinking
water. Newborn mice were sacri ﬁced, and the femoral head
cartilage was harvested. For sulfation analysis of chondroitin
Human Molecular Genetics, 2015, Vol. 24, No. 19 | 5571
 at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries on October 8, 2015http://hmg.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
sulfates, glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) were recovered from cartil-
age by digestion with papain, followed by cetylpyridinium chlor-
ide precipitation. After hyaluronic acid removal, puri ﬁed GAGs
were digested with both chondroitinase ABC and ACII, and
released disaccharides were analyzed by HPLC followed by detec-
tion at 232 nm (Supplementary Material, Fig. S2).
The amount of the non-sulfated disaccharide (ΔDi-0S) relative
to the total amount of disaccharides ( ΔDi-0S, ΔDi-4S and ΔDi-6S)
signiﬁcantly varied among groups (Kruskal– Wallis test = 36.22,
P = 0.0001). In dtd mice from treated females, a relevant decrease
(P < 0.001) with respect to dtd mice from untreated females was
detected (Fig. 1). NAC does not affect PG sulfation in wild-type
newborns: the relative amount of ΔDi-0S was similar in wild-
type pups from treated and untreated pregnant females. More-
over, the amount of 4-O-sulfated disaccharides ( ΔDi-4S) and
6-O-sulfated disaccharides ( ΔDi-6S), relative to the total amount
of disaccharides ( ΔDi-0S, ΔDi-4S and ΔDi-6S), showed a hetero-
genic distribution across groups ( F = 47.58, P <0 . 0 0 1a n dF = 5.45,
P = 0.0025, respectively) (Fig. 1). Regarding ΔDi-4S, in dtd mice
from treated females, a signi ﬁcant improvement was observed
with respect to dtd pups from untreated ones ( P < 0.001) even if
the amount was again lower than that in wild-type newborns
from untreated (P = 0.002) and treated (P < 0.001) females. Overall,
these results showed a marked increase in PG sulfation in new-
born mutant mice from females treated with NAC compared
with untreated ones, even if macromolecular sulfation did not
reach normal values. Regarding ΔDi-6S, an increase in dtd
newborns from treated mice with respect to dtd from untreated
females was evidenced ( P = 0.011), and the relative amount was
similar to that in wild-type newborns (Fig. 1).
In addition, the relative amounts of ΔDi-4S and ΔDi-6S in wild-
type newborns from treated and untreated females were similar,
indicating that NAC did not affect sulfation on C4 and C6 of the
hexosamine moiety and that NAC contribution to PG sulfation
was not relevant in wild-type mice as sulfate came mainly
from the extracellular environment because of the SLC26A2.
NAC treatment ameliorates the skeletal phenotype
of dtd newborns
The skeleton of newborn mice from both NAC-treated and un-
treated pregnant females was studied by differential staining
with alcian blue and alizarin red to stain cartilage and bone, re-
spectively. Several deformities were evident in the skeleton of
dtd newborns from untreated mice compared with wild-type lit-
termates: tibiae were curved, tibiae and femurs were shorter and
ilia were shorter and thicker. Conversely, in dtd newborn mice
from females treated with NAC, an amelioration toward a normal
bone morphology was observed, including longer and straighter
tibiae, longer femurs and longer and thinner ilia compared with
dtd pups from untreated females (Fig. 2).
In skeleton preparation stained with alcian blue and alizarin
red, morphometric analysis of tibiae, femurs and hips, performed
by two different blinded observers, conﬁrmed the skeletal pheno-
type amelioration observed in dtd pups from females treated
with the drug, compared with mutant newborns from untreated
Figure 1. NAC increases PG sulfation of femoral head cartilage in newborn dtd
mice. Cartilage PG sulfation from the femoral head was measured by HPLC
disaccharide analysis of chondroitin sulfate GAGs after digestion with
chondroitinase ABC and ACII on the basis of the relative amount of the non-
sulfated disaccharide ( ΔDi-0S), the 4-O-sulfated (Δ Di-4S) disaccharide and the 6-
O-sulfated ( ΔDi-6S) disaccharide. In dtd newborns from females treated with
NAC, a decrease in the relative amount of ΔDi-0S and a corresponding increase
in the mono-sulfated disaccharides ( ΔDi-4S and ΔDi-6S) were observed
compared with dtd newborns from untreated females indicating a signi ﬁcant
increase of PG sulfation, even if they do not reach the normal range. NAC does
not affect PG sulfation in wild-type mice; in fact, no differences in the relative
amounts of non-sulfated ( ΔDi-0S) and monosulfated ( ΔDi-4S and ΔDi-6S)
disaccharides were observed in cartilage from newborn wild-type mice born
from females treated with NAC, compared with the placebo group. Error bars
indicate mean ± SD ( n = 14); * P < 0.05; ** P <0 . 0 1 a n d * * *P < 0.001. Representative
HPLCs of this analysis are reported in Supplementary Material, Figure S2.
Figure 2. NAC ameliorates the skeletal phenotype of dtd newborns from females
treated with the drug. The skeletons of newborns mice were studied by
differential staining with alcian blue and alizarin red. The ﬁgure focuses on the
morphology of tibia, femur and hip. Several deformities were evident in the
skeleton of dtd versus wild-type newborns from untreated females: tibiae were
curved, tibiae and femurs were shorter and ilia (black arrows) were shorter and
thicker. Conversely, in dtd newborn mice from females treated with NAC, an
amelioration toward a normal bone morphology was observed, including longer
and straighter tibiae, longer femurs and longer and thinner ilia, compared with
dtd pups from untreated females. Morphometric analysis is reported in
Figure 3. Scale bar: 1 mm. Radiographs con ﬁrm the skeletal phenotype
amelioration of dtd newborn mice from females treated with NAC. X-ray of the
hind limbs showed that in dtd newborn mice from treated females, the tibiae
and femurs were more similar to their normal morphology compared with dtd
newborn mice from untreated females: tibiae were less curved and longer and
femurs were longer and thinner. No differences in wild-type newborn mice
from treated or untreated females were observed.
5572 | Human Molecular Genetics, 2015, Vol. 24, No. 19
 at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries on October 8, 2015http://hmg.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
females. In the tibia, the distance between metaphysis (Kruskal –
Wallis test = 27.6, P < 0.001) and curvature angle ( F = 162.5,
P < 0.001) showed a signi ﬁcant difference among the four groups
(Fig. 3A and B). A relevant improvement in the distance between
metaphysis and a decrease in the curvature angle of the diaph-
ysis were observed in the tibiae of dtd newborns from treated
mice with respect to dtd pups from untreated females ( P = 0.003
and P < 0.001, respectively). Similarly, femur length and width
were signi ﬁcantly different among groups ( F =2 6 . 4 ,P < 0.0001
and F = 5.1, P = 0.0039, respectively). Even if femur length amelio-
rated in dtd pups from treated mice with respect to dtd newborns
from untreated females (Fig. 3C), the improvement did not reach
Figure 3. Morphometric analysis of tibia, femur and ilium demonstrates the skeletal phenotype amelioration of dtd newborn mice from females treated with NAC.
Morphometric studies were performed by observers masked to treatment and genotype in the skeletal preparations stained with alcian blue and alizarin red shown in
Figure 2 by considering the mineralized part of each bone (white bar in each picture). Bone measurements in dtd newborn mice from females treated with NAC versus the
placebo group showed an amelioration toward the normal bone morphology. In fact in the tibia (A), an increase in the distance between the metaphysis and (B) a decrease
in the curvature angle were observed; in the femur (C), a trend toward the increase of its length and (D) a decrease in its width were detected; in the ilium (E), an increase in
the length and (F) a decrease in its width were found. No differences were observed in wild-type newborn mice from NAC-treated females and untreated ones. Statistical
comparison of the dtd pups from treated females compared with wild-type pups from untreated females demonstrated a rescue to normal values of the femur width and
ilium width, whereas the other parameters approached the wild-type range. Error bars indicate mean ± SD ( n = 7); *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01 and *** P < 0.001.
Human Molecular Genetics, 2015, Vol. 24, No. 19 | 5573
 at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries on October 8, 2015http://hmg.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
a statistical relevance ( P = 0.13); the length in dtd newborns from
treated females was still signi ﬁcantly lower than that in wild-
type pups from untreated and treated females ( P < 0.001 and
P < 0.01, respectively). The dtd NAC newborns did not show a dif-
ferent femur width with respect to wild-type pups from placebo-
treated females ( P > 0.90), but a relevant reduction with respect
to dtd pups from untreated females ( P = 0.007) (Fig. 3D).
Also morphometry of the hips was different among groups
(Fig. 3E, Kruskal –Wallis test = 26.4, P < 0.0001; Fig. 3F, F =8 . 1 ,
P = 0.0002). In particular, a signiﬁcant increase in the ilium length
in dtd pups from treated mice with respect to those from untreated
(P = 0.014) and a decrease in the ilium width, however not relevant,
were found (P = 0.15).
These ﬁndings support the hypothesis that NAC supplemen-
tation ameliorates the skeletal phenotype of dtd pups toward the
normal bone morphology.
The skeletal phenotype amelioration observed by alcian blue
and alizarin red staining was further con ﬁrmed by X-ray studies
of the hind limbs of newborn dtd and wild-type mice from both
treated and untreated females; in newborn dtd mice from fe-
males treated with NAC versus the untreated group, tibiae and
femurs were less curved and similar to wild-type ones (Fig. 2).
To assess whether NAC ameliorates bone mineralization,
bone mineral density (BMD) was measured at the total body
with a GE Lunar Piximus. BMD of newborn dtd mice from untreated
females was similar to that of wild-type mice (0.018 ± 0.004 versus
0.017 ± 0.001 mg/cm2, n = 8); in dtd newborns from treated females,
BMD was not affected by NAC (0.019 ± 0.003, n =8 ) .
NAC treatment improves chondrocyte proliferation
in tibia epiphysis of newborn dtd mice
In previous studies, we demonstrated reduced chondrocyte pro-
liferation in dtd mice compared with wild-type littermates. This
observation was made in chondrocyte cultures ( 21), in the fem-
oral head of newborn mice by proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA) immunohistochemistry ( 3) and in the proliferative zone
of the tibia growth plate of P21 animals ( 22). The increase in PG
sulfation toward normal values and the skeleton amelioration
due to NAC suggested an impact also on chondrocyte prolifer-
ation. In order to study chondrocyte proliferation, PCNA immu-
nohistochemistry was performed on 7 µm thick cryosections of
the proximal epiphysis of the tibiae from wild-type and dtd new-
born mice from both treated with the drug or untreated pregnant
females. Tibia cryosections were incubated with an anti-PCNA
antibody and counterstained with hematoxylin (Fig. 4A). Then,
the number of proliferating chondrocytes (PCNA-positive cells)
relative to the total chondrocyte population was measured in a
ﬁxed area (100 000 µm 2, 400 µm × 250 µm rectangle) of the tibia
epiphysis and tibia growth plate (Fig. 4B). The percentage of pro-
liferating chondrocytes of the proximal epiphysis and growth
plate was signi ﬁcantly different among the four groups (Krus-
kal–Wallis test = 23.69, P = 0.0001 and Kruskal –Wallis test = 22.37,
P = 0.0001, respectively). Interestingly, the percentage of prolifer-
ating chondrocytes of the proximal epiphysis in dtd newborns
from treated females was not different from that in wild-type
pups ( P > 0.90) and signi ﬁcantly higher than that in dtd new-
borns from untreated females ( P < 0.001) (Fig. 4B), whereas the
percentage of proliferating chondrocytes in dtd pups from un-
treated females was signi ﬁcantly reduced than that in wild-
type pups from untreated ( P < 0.001) and treated ( P = 0.002) mice.
In dtd mice born from untreated females, the percentage of pro-
liferating chondrocytes in the tibia growth plate was signiﬁcantly
lower than that in wild-type newborns from untreated ( P < 0.001)
and treated females (P = 0.002). As observed in proliferating chon-
drocytes of proximal epiphysis, the percentage of proliferating
chondrocytes in the growth plate of dtd newborns from females
treated with NAC was similar to that in wild-type pups ( P > 0.90),
but it was statistically higher than that in dtd mice born from un-
treated females (P = 0.0012) (Fig. 4B). In wild-type littermates, con-
sistent with no differences detected in PG sulfation and skeletal
phenotype after NAC treatment, also chondrocyte proliferation
was not affected both in the epiphysis and in the growth plate.
Figure 4. Chondrocyte proliferation is increased in the epiphysis of dtd newborns
from NAC-treated females. (A) PCNA immunostaining of proximal tibia epiphysis
cryosections obtained from wild-type and dtd newborns from females both
untreated and treated with NAC. Nuclei of PCNA-positive cells are brown;
sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. Scale bar: 200 µm. The areas
enclosed in the red and black boxes (epiphysis and growth plate, respectively)
are shown at higher magni ﬁcation. Scale bar: 50 µm. ( B)I na ﬁxed area
[100 000 µm 2, 400 µm × 250 µm white dashed rectangle in ( A)] of tibia epiphysis
and growth plate, the number of PCNA-positive cells relative to the total cell
population was determined. The percentage of proliferating cells in dtd
newborn mice from females treated with NAC increased compared with dtd
newborns from untreated females and reached normal values when compared
with wild-type newborns. In wild-type newborns, chondrocyte proliferation was
not affected by NAC. Error bars indicate mean ± SD (n = 5) and an average of four
sections per animal was considered; ** P < 0.01 and *** P < 0.001.
5574 | Human Molecular Genetics, 2015, Vol. 24, No. 19
 at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries on October 8, 2015http://hmg.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
Cartilage PG sulfation increase in newborn dtd mice
by NAC matches increased GAG sulfation of urine
Urinary GAGs come from physiological PG metabolism linked to
remodeling of extracellular matrix components; thus, urinary
GAG concentration and GAG species have been used as biomar-
kers for speci ﬁc disorders such as mucopolysaccharidosis ( 23).
We previously reported that GAG urine from dtd animals at P30
and P60 was undersulfated, compared with wild-type littermates
(24). Thus, to further support cartilage PG sulfation increase in dtd
newborns from pregnant mice treated with NAC, sulfation of urin-
ary chondroitin sulfate GAGs was measured. For this purpose,
urine from urinary bladders of dtd and wild-type newborns from
treated or untreated females was collected, and GAG sulfation
was measured after chondroitinase digestion, disaccharide label-
ing with 2-aminoacridone and HPLC analysis followed by ﬂuores-
cence detection (Supplementary Material, Fig. S3). PG sulfation
was signiﬁcantly different between groups (Kruskal–Wallis test =
17.85, P < 0.0001) The amount of non-sulfated disaccharide (ΔDi-0S)
relative to the total amount of disaccharides ( ΔDi-0S, ΔDi-4S and
ΔDi-6S) in the urine of dtd newborns from females treated with
NAC signiﬁcantly decreased compared with urine of dtd newborns
from untreated females (P = 0.0012) (Fig. 5), even if it did not reach
wild-type values (P < 0.001). The ΔDi-0S decrease was paralleled by
as i g n iﬁcant increase in ΔDi-4S in the urine of dtd newborns from
treated mice versus dtd newborns from untreated mice ( P < 0.01),
even if it did not reach wild-type values (P < 0.01). These data con-
ﬁrmed cartilage PG sulfation analysis, as GAGs from urine of dtd
newborns from mice treated with NAC were less undersulfated
compared with dtd newborns from untreated mice. As already ob-
served in cartilage sulfation studies, urinary GAG sulfation was
not affected by NAC in wild-type littermates.
Discussion
Mutations in the SLC26A2 gene cause a spectrum of skeletal phe-
notypes which includes, in the order of decreasing severity,
ACG1B, lethal before or shortly after birth, AO2, lethal after birth,
DTD, a severe chondrodysplasia compatible with life and EDM4,
a mild chondrodysplasia with minor radiological changes and
clubfoot.
DTD is an autosomal recessive disorder that affects cartilage
and bone development. Although skeletal problems are already
present at birth, abnormal growth continues post-natally. Now-
adays, no pharmacological, cell or gene therapy is available for
DTD; patients take advantage of physiotherapy to relieve pain
and manage disabilities. Moreover, orthopedic surgery corrects
severe deformities such as scoliosis corrected by arthrodesis, or
both hip osteoarthritis and knee instability and degeneration cor-
rected by arthroplasty (11,25); however, all these remedies do not
eradicate deformities, which are likely to occur again.
The disease is caused by mutations in the SLC26A2 gene en-
coding for a sulfate –chloride antiporter of the cell membrane
and results in sulfate uptake impairment. This sulfate transporter
is ubiquitous, but the consequences of its functional impairment
affect tissues with a high demand for sulfate, above all cartilage, as
cartilage extracellular matrix is rich in sulfated PGs. Thus, muta-
tions in the SLC26A2 gene cause cartilage PG undersulfation.
Previous studies using cartilage biopsies, ﬁbroblast and chon-
drocyte cultures from patients with ACG1B, AO2 and DTD demon-
strated a direct correlation between the severity of the clinical
phenotype and the degree of functional impairment of the sulfate
transporter and cartilage PG sulfation. The decrease in cartilage PG
sulfation is associated with more severe clinical phenotypes ( 2);
this ﬁnding suggests the chance to ameliorate the clinical pheno-
type of DTD patients by increasing PG sulfation.
In order to overcome the sulfate transport defect and to improve
cartilage PG sulfation, alternative drug strategies targeted at in-
creasing cytosolic sulfate can be considered. It has been reported
that some SLC26A2 mutations cause protein misfolding, resulting
in a defective SLC26A2 membrane localization (6,26); thus a thera-
peutic option might consider the use of chemical chaperones in
o r d e rt or e s t o r et h ec o r r e c tf o l d i n ga n dt r a fﬁcking of the mutant sul-
fate transporter. In fact, the combination of structure-guided cor-
rectors (chemical chaperones) represents an effective therapeutic
approach for cysticﬁbrosis in patients bearing theΔF508 mutation
in the cysticﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator, which
impairs its folding, plasma membrane expression, function and
stability (27). However, chemical chaperones would not be useful
for mutations impairing SLC26A2 transporter activity without af-
fecting its folding and/or targeting to the plasma membrane.
Inorganic sulfate in the cytoplasm may be derived either from
the extracellular ﬂuids or from the catabolism of sulfur-contain-
ing amino acids (cysteine and methionine) and other thiols. The
latter pathway can provide cytoplasmic sulfate for macromolecu-
lar sulfation, independently of the nature of the SLC26A2 muta-
tion. We have previously demonstrated that sulfate recruitment
from sulfur-containing amino acids is active in cultured
ﬁbroblasts and chondrocytes from SLC26A2 patients, and this
pathway, at leastin vitro, can partially compensate the lack of sul-
fate caused by the reduced uptake function of the mutant sulfate
transporter ( 12,13). Moreover, using the dtd mouse, we demon-
strated that the same pathway is active also in cartilage in vivo
(14). In that study, the hypodermic injection of NAC to newborn
dtd mice for 1 week resulted in a mild but signi ﬁcant increase
of PG sulfation due to NAC catabolism. However, pharmacoki-
netic experiments showed that NAC was removed from the
bloodstream of treated mice within 8 h, indicating that its mild
contribution to macromolecular sulfation might be due to the
fast drug turnover. These results suggest that NAC ef ﬁcacy
might be improved by maintaining its plasma level constant.
Figure 5. Urine GAG sulfation analysis in newborn dtd mice from NAC-treated
females con ﬁrms cartilage PG sulfation increase. GAGs in the urine were
puriﬁed by cetylpyridinium chloride precipitation, and sulfation was measured
by HPLC disaccharide analysis after pre-column derivatization with 2-
aminoacridone (Supplementary Material, Fig. S3). Results showed a signi ﬁcant
decrease in the relative amount of the non-sulfated disaccharide ( ΔDi-0S) and a
signiﬁcant increase in the amount of ΔDi-4S in newborn dtd mice from
pregnant mice treated with NAC compared with dtd newborn from the placebo
group, indicating an increase in urinary GAG sulfation that paralleled cartilage
PG sulfation increase. As expected, regardless of NAC treatment, urinary GAG
sulfation was not affected in wild-type newborns from both NAC-treated and
untreated females. Error bars indicate mean ± SD ( n = 3; each sample comes
from pooling four urinary bladders); ** P < 0.01 and *** P < 0.001.
Human Molecular Genetics, 2015, Vol. 24, No. 19 | 5575
 at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries on October 8, 2015http://hmg.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
For this purpose, NAC plasma levels were kept stable by ad-
ministration of the drug in the drinking water. However, this
treatment can be considered in adult mutant mice or at least in
animals at the weaning age (P21), when unfortunately severe
skeletal defects are already present. For this reason, in order to
treat mutant mice in the very early steps of the onset of the skel-
etal phenotype, we treated pregnant females for the whole preg-
nancy and we evaluated drug ef ﬁcacy in newborn mice. This
approach was valuable as skeletogenesis starts in the fetal period
and the dtd phenotype is already present in mutant mice at birth
(21) and in patients as well ( 28).
By treating wild-type female mice with free access to 30 g/l
NAC in the drinking water during pregnancy, we demonstrated
that NAC was present both in female plasma and in fetuses con-
ﬁrming placental transfer of NAC to fetuses as previously re-
ported in humans ( 29) and suggesting the opportunity to treat
fetuses by treating pregnant mouse females.
Once assessed the effectiveness of the administration method,
the potential ef ﬁcacy of NAC was studied in newborn wild-type
and dtd mice from females treated with NAC or the placebo (drink-
ing water) by biochemical, morphological and immunohisto-
chemical studies of the skeleton. HPLC analysis demonstrated a
marked increase of cartilage PG sulfation in the femoral head of
mutant mice born from females treated with NAC, compared
with the ones treated with the placebo. Even if the PG sulfation in-
crease did not reach normal values after NAC treatment, the par-
tial rescue of macromolecular sulfation was translated also at the
morphological level; in fact, when the skeletons of dtd newborns
from mice treated with NAC were compared with those of dtd
newborns from the placebo group, there was a clear amelioration
toward the normal bone morphology: bones of dtd newborns from
the treated group were longer and straighter when compared with
untreated dtd mice. This amelioration was conﬁrmed by morpho-
metric studies of tibiae, femurs and ilia. The BMD was not different
in newborn dtd mice compared with wild-type animals and was
not affected by NAC, suggesting that the drug has no impact on
the mineralization process.
In previous studies, we demonstrated bothin vitro- and in vivo-
reduced chondrocyte proliferation in mutant mice is caused by
defects in Ihh and Wnt signaling due to cartilage PG undersulfa-
tion (3,21,22,30). In fact, Ihh as well as other growth factors bind to
sulfated GAG chains; the extent of binding and thus diffusion in
the extracellular matrix relies on the degree of PG sulfation ( 31).
Thus, in order to determine whether NAC treatment affects
also chondrocyte proliferation due to the recovery of PG sulfation,
PCNA immunostaining was performed on tibia cryosections of
dtd and wild-type newborns from both treated and untreated fe-
males. A reduced number of proliferating cells was detected in
the epiphysis and in the growth plate of untreated mutant new-
born mice compared with wild-type mice, whereas in treated dtd
newborn mice, chondrocyte proliferation reached normal values.
Compared to our previous work in which NAC was injected daily
(14), the different administration method was crucial in order to
guarantee a constant concentration of NAC in the bloodstream of
pregnant females, resulting in a greater PG sulfation effect in new-
born dtd mice that was translated also in an amelioration of the
skeleton at the morphological level. A dose-ranging study per-
formed on C57Bl/6 females demonstrated that the NAC concentra-
tion used in this study (30 g/l in the drinking water) can be halved
without affecting the plasma drug concentration.
The choice of NAC with respect t o other sulfur-containing
amino acids such as cysteine comes from the observation that
cysteine has lower solubility in water; in addition, NAC is a
FDA-approved drug largely used in clinics with minimal side
effects ( 32). In this work, the therapeutic role of NAC relies on
its capacity to provide, through its catabolism, cytoplasmic sul-
fate for macromolecular sulfation, as demonstrated by PG sulfa-
tion increase in cartilage and urine. This is a novel not yet
considered property of this molecule; in fact as discussed previ-
ously, NAC is a well-known drug used for its antioxidant proper-
ties, reduction of disul ﬁde bonds and serving as a precursor of
cysteine for glutathione synthesis ( 17).
In developing a therapy, it is mandatory to set up reliable non-
invasive protocols in order to evaluate the effectiveness of the
treatment in patients. This is not trivial when considering skeletal
disorders as non-invasive methods to evaluate the cartilage and
bone phenotype in patients rely mainly on X-rays, computed tom-
ography and magnetic resonance imaging. GAGs from urine have
been investigated in many disorders including mucopolysacchar-
idoses, kidney disorders, diabetes and leukemia ( 33–37). In add-
ition, GAG sulfation was altered in the urine of a patient with
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, Omani type, a recessive chondro-
dysplasia with a defect in GAG sulfation ( 38). We demonstrated
previously that GAG sulfation in the urine of 1- and 2-month-old
dtd mice was reduced compared with age-matched wild-type an-
imals, suggesting that urine GAG analysis is potentially relevant as
a biomarker to follow the disease course (24). On the basis of these
data, we measured the sulfation of urinary GAGs in newborns
from females treated with NAC versus the untreated group. Simi-
larly to results reported in cartilage, in dtd newborns from treated
pregnant mice, a decrease in the relative amount of the non-sul-
fated disaccharide (ΔDi-0S) and an increase in the relative amount
of the 4-O-sulfated disaccharide (ΔDi-4S) compared with untreated
mutant mice were observed. These data suggested that urine GAG
sulfation analysis could be a non-invasive biomarker in order to
ch
eck the efﬁcacy of the treatment.
In conclusion, we have demonstrated at the biochemical and
morphological levels that NAC, through its catabolism, is a useful
source of sulfate for macromolecular sulfation in the dtd mouse,
an animal model of DTD. By comparison to the previous drug ad-
ministration method that considered daily hypodermic injection
(14), we have observed that it is crucial for the treatment to pro-
vide tissues with a steady supply of the drug by ﬁxing its plasma
concentration. Studies on new drug delivery systems that allow
the regular release of NAC are under investigation in order to
treat dtd mice even after birth and to pave the way on a potential
NAC pharmacological therapy to ameliorate this painful chon-
drodysplasia and thus the quality of life of DTD patients.
Materials and Methods
Mouse care and drug treatment
The dtd mouse is a knock-in for the c.1184C>T transition causing an
A386V substitution in the eighth transmembrane domain of the
Slc26a2 gene product, which strongly reduces the activity of the
transporter (21). In this study, wild-type and homozygous mutant
mice (dtd) with a C57Bl/6J×129/SV background were used. Genotyp-
ing to distinguish mutant from heterozygous and wild-type animals
was performed by polymerase chain reaction, using genomic DNA
extracted from mouse tail clips as described previously (21).
Animals were bred with free access to water and standard
pelleted food. Care and use of mice for the drug treatment de-
scribed in this study were in compliance with relevant animal
welfare institutional guidelines, and protocols were approved
by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Pavia.
In order to achieve an oral dosage of 4 g/kg body weight/day of
NAC, a solution 30 g/l NAC (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA),
5576 | Human Molecular Genetics, 2015, Vol. 24, No. 19
 at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries on October 8, 2015http://hmg.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
brought to pH 7–7.4 with NaOH, was made fresh every day and ad-
ministered to mice in place of drinking water, used in the placebo
group. This concentration was based on average water consump-
tion per mouse (6-month-old; 30 g body weight) of 4 ml/day
measured in our animal facility.
In order to evaluate NAC intestinal absorption in pregnant
mice treated with the oral solution of the drug, the plasma NAC
concentration from wild-type pregnant mice was measured by
reverse-phase HPLC after pre-column ﬂuorescence derivatiza-
tion using SBD-F (Sigma-Aldrich). The treatment with the drug
lasted from 0.5 day post-coitum up to the 17th day of pregnancy;
then pregnant mice were sacriﬁced and their blood was collected
and centrifuged to get plasma. As shown in Supplementary Ma-
terial Figure S1B, a peak corresponding to NAC was present in
chromatograms from HPLC thiol analysis of treated pregnant
mouse plasma, whereas the drug was not present in chromato-
grams from untreated pregnant mouse plasma (Supplementary
Material, Fig. S1A). A concentration of 1.0 ± 0.6 µg NAC/ml plasma
(n = 5) was detected in treated females, indicating that the drug
administered orally was absorbed in the intestine.
NAC placental transfer to fetuses was evaluated by HPLC thiol
analysis in fetus homogenates, from wild-type pregnant females
sacriﬁced after 17 days of treatment with 30 g/l NAC in the drink-
ing water. Fetuses were homogenized immediately after their
withdrawal, and NAC concentration in homogenates was mea-
sured by reverse-phase HPLC. A concentration of 0.7 ± 0.3 µg
NAC/g of fetus weight (n = 16) was detected in homogenates of fe-
tuses from treated pregnant females (Supplementary Material,
Fig. S1D). Thus, these data indicated that NAC given orally to
pregnant mice crosses placenta and reaches fetuses; conversely,
NAC was not detected in fetus homogenates from untreated
pregnant mice, as already observed in plasma from untreated
pregnant mice (Supplementary Material, Fig. S1C).
Subsequently for a dose-ranging study, two groups of C57Bl/
6JOla-Hsd females (Harlan Laboratories) were treated for 17
days with oral doses of 4 and 2 g/kg body weight/day of NAC, re-
spectively; after 17 days of drug administration, the NAC plasma
concentration was similar to the plasma drug concentration of
NAC-treated pregnant mice used in this study. Interestingly,
the same NAC plasma concentration was observed with oral
doses of 4 and 2 g/kg body weight/day [1.6 ± 0.7 and 1.9 ± 0.8 µg
NAC/ml plasma, respectively ( n = 5)].
HPLC thiol analysis in mouse plasma and fetuses
NAC concentration was determined in mouse plasma and fetus
homogenates. Female mice were sacriﬁced at 17 days of pregnancy,
500 µl of blood was collected and 10 µl of 0.5 ethylenediaminete-
traacetic acid (EDTA), pH 8.00, was added. Then samples were cen-
trifuged at 3000g for 15 min to recover the plasma that was used for
NAC analysis by HPLC with pre-column derivatization.
Fetuses at embryonic day 17.5 were collected and homoge-
nized in 500 µl of phosphate-buffered saline using an Ultra-Turrax
disperser (IKA–Werke, Staufen, Germany) and then centrifuged at
13 000g for 5 min at 4°C; supernatants were used for NAC analysis
by pre-column derivatization.
Samples derivatization was performed according to Ferinet al.
(39). For analysis of total NAC, 50 µl (70 pmol) of cysteamine
(Sigma-Aldrich) as internal standard and 15 µl of 10% (v/v) tribu-
tylphosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) in dimetil formamide (Sigma-Al-
drich) were added to 100 µl of sample to reduce disul ﬁde bonds
and incubated for 30 min at 4°C. Then, 150 µl of 10% (w/v) tri-
chloroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 m  EDTA were added
to precipitate proteins and samples were centrifuged at 15 000 g
for 10 min. An aliquot of 60 µl of the supernatant was derivatized
with 120 µl of 125 m  potassium borate (Sigma-Aldrich), pH 10.5,
4m  E D T Aa n d6 0 µ lo f1 m g / m lS B D - F( S i g m a - A l d r i c h )i n
125 m potassium borate, pH 9.5, at 60°C for 60 min in the dark.
Samples were kept in the dark at 4°C until analysis.
For HPLC analysis, a binary pump system (1525µ Binary HPLC
Pump, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a ﬂuorescence de-
tector (2475 Multy λ Fluorescence Detector, Waters) set at λex
385 nm and λem 515 nm was used. Chromatography was carried
out at room temperature with a LichroCART 250-4 Superspher
100 RP18 (4 × 250 mm) column (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany)
and LiChrospher 100 RP18 (4 × 25 mm) (Merck) as pre-column.
Mobile phases were 0.1  KH2PO4 (Merck), pH 3.5 (Buffer A) and
0.1  KH2PO4 (Merck), pH 3.5 in 50:50 (v/v) H 2O and acetonitrile
(Merck) (Buffer B). The mobile phase ﬂow rate was 0.8 ml/min,
and elution was performed with a linear gradient of 0– 20% Buffer
B in 30 min.
HPLC analysis of GAG sulfation in femoral head cartilage
For cartilage disaccharide anal ysis, cartilage from the femoral
heads of newborn mice was carefully isolated under a dissection
microscope (Leica Microsystems, Milano, Italy) and processed as
described previously ( 21). To recover GAGs, tissue specimens
were digested with 10 U of papain (Sigma-Aldrich) in 0.1  so-
dium acetate, pH 5.6, 5 m  EDTA and 5 m  cysteine at 65°C for
24 h. After papain denaturation at 100°C, released GAGs were re-
covered by precipitation with 1% (w/v) cetylpyridinium chloride
(ﬁnal concentration). The precipitate was washed three times
with 10% (w/v) potassium acetate in 96% ethanol and with 96%
ethanol, respectively, dried and solubilized in hyaluronidase buf-
fer (20 m  sodium acetate, pH 6.0, 75 m  NaCl). Hyaluronic acid
was removed by digestion with 4 U of Streptomyces hyaluronidase
(Seikagaku Corp., Tokyo, Japan) at 60°C overnight, followed by
ultraﬁltration with Ultrafree— 0.5 Centrifugal ﬁlter units (nominal
molecular weight limit 5K, Merck). Puri ﬁed GAGs were digested
with 30 mU of both chondroitinase ABC (Seikagaku Corp.) and
chondroitinase ACII (Seikagaku Corp.) in 30 m  sodium acetate,
30 m Tris-acetate, pH 7.35, at 37°C overnight. Undigested pro-
ducts were removed by precipitation with 4 volumes of 96% etha-
nol and storage at −20°C overnight, followed by centrifugation.
Disaccharides in the supernatants were evaporated, solubilized
in water and injected in a Supelcosil LC-SAX1 (Sigma-Aldrich)
HPLC column (4.6 × 250 mm), using a gradient of 5 –400 m 
KH2PO4 (Merck), pH 4.5, at a ﬂow rate of 1 ml/min and room tem-
perature (2). The elution pro ﬁle was measured at 232 nm with a
diode array detector (2998 PDA Detector, Waters).
Analysis of the skeleton and morphometric analyses
Skeletal characterization of newborn mice was performed by
double staining with alcian blue and alizarin red, as described
previously (21). Brieﬂy, newborns were sacriﬁced, dissected to re-
move skin and internal organs, ﬁxed in 96% ethanol and defatted
in acetone for 2 weeks. The preparations were then stained with a
solution containing 1 volume o f 0.3% (w/v) Alcian Blue 8GX
(Sigma-Aldrich) in 70% ethanol, 1 volume of 0.1% Alizarin Red S
(Sigma-Aldrich) in 96% ethanol, 1 volume of acetic acid and 17 vo-
lumes of 70% ethanol, for 3 days at 37°C. After staining, the speci-
mens were cleared in 1% KOH in glycerol (80:20, 60:40, 40:60 and
20:80) until complete tissue clari ﬁcation, changing the solution
every 2 –3 days; then skeletal preparations were stored in 100%
glycerol.
Human Molecular Genetics, 2015, Vol. 24, No. 19 | 5577
 at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries on October 8, 2015http://hmg.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
Skeletal preparations were photographed on a Leica M165 FC
stereomicroscope connected to a Leica DFC425 C digital camera;
morphometric measurements were performed by two different
observers blinded to treatment and genotype using the LAS 4.5
software (Leica Microsystems).
Radiography and BMD
Radiographies of the hind limbs were performed in a Faxitron
MX-20 cabinet X-ray system (Faxitron Bioptics, Tucson, AZ,
USA). The exposure was set at 33 kV for 20 s with 5-fold magni ﬁ-
cation; high resolution X-ray mammography ﬁlms and intensify-
ing screens (Kodak, Rochester, Madison, NY, USA) were used.
BMD was measured at the total body using a GE Lunar Piximus
(GE Healthcare, WI, USA); data are expressed as mg/cm 2.
PCNA immunostaining
Tibiae of wild-type and dtd newborn mice were dissected,
cleaned from the surrounding soft tissue, embedded in optimal
cutting temperature (Sakura, Leiden, The Netherlands), immedi-
ately frozen in dry ice and stored at −80°C. About 7 μm thick sec-
tions were cut parallel to the long axis of the tibia using a Leica
CM 1850 UV cryostat (Leica Microsystems). For the detection of
proliferating cells in epiphyseal tibia cryosections, a PCNA immu-
nohistochemistry assay was used (PCNA Staining Kit, Life Tech-
nologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA), according to the manufacturer ’s
instructions. Images were collected using a Leica DM 5500B
microscope connected to a Leica DFC 480 digital camera through
the LAS 4.5 software (Leica Microsystems). The number of prolif-
erating chondrocytes (PCNA-positive cells) was determined in a
ﬁxed area (100 000 µm 2, 400 µm × 250 µm rectangle) of the tibia
epiphysis and growth plate.
HPLC analysis of GAG sulfation in mouse urine
GAG sulfation in the urine was measured by disaccharide analysis
using HPLC withﬂuorescence detection. For this purpose, 100 µl of
urine was pooled from four newborn mice urinary bladders and
centrifuged at 13 000g for 5 min to clarify samples. Supernatants
were collected and 1/50 (v/v) of 10% (w/v) cetylpyridinium chloride
was added and incubated overnight at 4°C. Samples were then
centrifuged for 15 min at 13 000 g at 4°C, and pellets were washed
three times with 500 µl of 10% (w/v) potassium acetate in 96%
ethanol and with 500 µl of 96% ethanol, respectively. Pellets were
air-dried and subsequently resuspended in 200 µl of 0.1  ammo-
nium acetate buffer, pH 7.35, containing 30 mU of chondroitinase
ABC (Seikagaku Corp.) and 30 mU of chondroitinase ACII (Seikaga-
ku Corp.) and incubated at 37°C overnight. Samples were then
cleared by centrifugation, and the supernatants were lyophilized.
The lyophilizates were dissolved in 40 µl of 12.5 m  2-aminoacri-
done (Life Technologies) in 85:15 (v/v) dimethyl sulfoxide: glacial
acetic acid and incubated in the dark for 15 min before adding
40 µl of 1.25  NaBH3CN (Sigma-Aldrich), followed by incubation
at 37°C overnight in the dark.
HPLC was carried out with a C18 column (Prontosil 120-3-C18-
ace-EPS 3.0, 4.6 × 200 mm, Bischoff, Leonberg, Germany) at room
temperature. Mobile phases were 0.1  ammonium acetate
(Sigma-Aldrich), pH 8.0 (Buffer A) and 60:40 (v/v) acetonitrile
(Merck): 0.1  ammonium acetate (Sigma-Aldrich), pH 8.0 (Buffer
B). The mobile phase ﬂow rate was 1 ml/min and the following
elution program was used: 3 min 100% Buffer A, linear gradient
to 25% Buffer B in 6 min and linear gradient to 41% Buffer B in
30 min. Eluates were monitored using a ﬂuorescence detector
(2475 Multy λ Fluorescence Detector, Waters), with excitation
and emission wavelengths of 425 and 525 nm, respectively.
Statistical analysis
Quantitative data are summarized as mean ± standard deviation
(SD). Differences between groups (newborn wild-type from fe-
males treated with placebo, newborn wild-type from females
treated with NAC, newborn dtd from females treated with pla-
cebo and newborn dtd from females treated with NAC) were eval-
uated using parametric analysis of variance (ANOV A) or the
analogous non-parametric test (Kruskal –Wallis test) when the
assumptions for ANOV A were not veriﬁed. If a signi ﬁcant differ-
ence was found, multiple comparison test with Bonferroni cor-
rection for the number of contrasts investigated ( n =6 ) w a s
applied. After a signi ﬁcant Kruskal –Wallis test, Mann –Whitney
test was used in the post hoc analyses.
A P-value less than 0.05 was considered signi ﬁcant. In the
multiple comparison test, P < 0.0083 was a marker of signi ﬁcant
contrast; however, the ﬁnal values were reported at P < 0.05.
All the analyses were conducted using STATA 12 ® software.
Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material is available at HMG online.
Acknowledgement
The authors sincerely thank Dr Marcella Facchini for helpful sug-
gestions on administration of N-acetylcysteine to mice.
Conﬂict of Interest statement. None declared
Funding
The research leading to these results has received funding from
the European Community ’s Seventh Framework Programme
under grant agreement no. 602300 (SYBIL), Telethon-Italy (grant
no. GGP06076) and Fondazione CARIPLO (grant no. 2011-0270).
References
1. Hästbacka, J., de la Chapelle, A., Mahtani, M.M., Clines, G.,
Reeve Daly, M.P., Daly, M., Hamilton, B.A., Kusumi, K., Trivedi,
B., Weaver, A. et al. (1994) The dia strophic dysplasia gene
encodes a novel sulfate transporter: positional cloning by
ﬁne-structure linkage disequilibrium mapping. Cell, 78,
1073–1087.
2. Rossi, A., Kaitila, I., Wilcox, W.R., Rimoin, D.L., Steinmann, B.,
Cetta, G. and Superti-Furga, A. (1998) Proteoglycan sulfation
in cartilage and cell cultures from patients with sulfate trans-
porter chondrodysplasias: relationship to clinical severity
and indications on the role of intracellular sulfate production.
Matrix Biol., 17, 361–369.
3. Mertz, E.L., Facchini, M., Pham, A.T., Gualeni, B., De Leonardis,
F., Rossi, A. and Forlino, A. (2012) Matrix disruptions, growth,
and degradation of cartilage with impaired sulfation. J. Biol.
Chem., 287, 22030–22042.
4. Kvist, A.J., Johnson, A.E., Morgelin, M., Gustafsson, E., Bengts-
son, E., Lindblom, K., Aszodi, A., Fassler, R., Sasaki, T., Timpl,
R. et al. (2006) Chondroitin sulfate perlecan enhances collagen
ﬁbril formation. Implications for perlecan chondrodyspla-
sias. J. Biol. Chem. , 281, 33127–33139.
5578 | Human Molecular Genetics, 2015, Vol. 24, No. 19
 at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries on October 8, 2015http://hmg.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
5. Karniski, L.P. (2001) Mutations in the diastrophic dysplasia
sulfate transporter (DTDST) gene: correlation between sulfate
transport activity and chondrodysplasia phenotype. Hum.
Mol. Genet., 10, 1485–1490.
6. Karniski, L.P. (2004) Functional expression and cellular distri-
bution of diastrophic dysplasia sulfate transporter (DTDST)
gene mutations in HEK cells. Hum. Mol. Genet. , 13, 2165–2171.
7. Lamy, M. and Maroteaux, P. (1960) [Diastrophic nanism].
Presse Med., 68, 1977–1980.
8. Horton, W.A., Rimoin, D.L., Lachman, R.S., Skovby, F., Hollis-
ter, D.W., Spranger, J., Scott, C.I. and Hall, J.G. (1978) The
phenotypic variability of diastrophic dysplasia. J. Pediatr., 93,
609–613.
9. Kruger, L., Pohjolainen, T., Kaitila, I., Kautiainen, H., Arkela-
Kautiainen, M. and Hurri, H. (2013) Health-related quality of
life and socioeconomic situation among diastrophic dyspla-
sia patients in Finland. J. Rehabil. Med. , 45, 308–313.
10. Jalanko, T., Remes, V., Peltonen, J., Poussa, M. and Helenius, I.
(2009) Treatment of spinal deformities in patients with dia-
strophic dysplasia: a long-term, population based, retro-
spective outcome study. Spine (Phila Pa 1976) , 34, 2151–2157.
11. Helenius, I., Remes, V., Tallroth, K., Peltonen, J., Poussa, M.
and Paavilainen, T. (2003) Total hip arthroplasty in dia-
strophic dysplasia. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. , 85-A, 441–447.
12. Rossi, A., Cetta, A., Piazza, R., Bonaventure, J., Steinmann, B.
and Superti-Furga, A. (2003) In vitro proteoglycan sulfation de-
rived from sulfhydryl compounds in sulfate transporter
chondrodysplasias. Pediatr. Pathol. Mol. Med. , 22, 311–321.
13. Rossi, A., Bonaventure, J., Delezoide, A.L., Superti-Furga, A.
and Cetta, G. (1997) Undersulfation of cartilage proteoglycans
ex vivo and increased contribution of amino acid sulfur to sul-
fation in vitro in McAlister dysplasia/atelosteogenesis type 2.
Eur. J. Biochem. , 248, 741–747.
14. Pecora, F., Gualeni, B., Forlino, A., Superti-Furga, A., Tenni, R.,
Cetta, G. and Rossi, A. (2006) In vivo contribution of amino acid
sulfur to cartilage proteoglycan sulfation. Biochem. J. , 398,
509–514.
15. Dominy, J.E. Jr, Hirschberger, L.L., Coloso, R.M. and Stipanuk,
M.H. (2006) Regulation of cysteine dioxygenase degradation is
mediated by intracellular cysteine levels and the ubiquitin-26
S proteasome system in the living rat. Biochem. J. , 394,
267–273.
16.
Rushworth, G.F. and Megson, I.L. (2014) Existing and potential
therapeutic uses for N-acetylcysteine: the need for conver-
sion to intracellular glutathione for antioxidant bene ﬁts.
Pharmacol. Ther., 141, 150–159.
1 7 .S a m u n i ,Y . ,G o l d s t e i n ,S . ,D e a n ,O . M .a n dB e r k ,M .( 2 0 1 3 )
The chemistry and biological activities of N-acetylcysteine.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta , 1830, 4117–4129.
18. Aruoma, O.I., Halliwell, B., Hoey, B.M. and Butler, J. (1989) The
antioxidant action of N-acetylcysteine: its reaction with
hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radical, superoxide, and hypo-
chlorous acid. Free Radic. Biol. Med. , 6, 593–597.
19. Kerksick, C. and Willoughby, D. (2005) The antioxidant role of
glutathione and N-acetyl-cysteine supplements and exer-
cise-induced oxidative stress. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. , 2,3 8–44.
20. Bavarsad Shahripour, R., Harrigan, M.R. and Alexandrov, A.V.
(2014) N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in neurological disorders: me-
chanisms of action and therapeutic opportunities. Brain
Behav., 4, 108–122.
21. Forlino, A., Piazza, R., Tiveron, C., Della Torre, S., Tatangelo, L.,
Bonafe, L., Gualeni, B., Romano, A., Pecora, F., Superti-Furga,
A. et al. (2005) A dia strophic dysplasia sulfate transporter
(SLC26A2) mutant mouse: morphological and biochemical
characterization of the resulting chondrodysplasia pheno-
type. Hum. Mol. Genet. , 14, 859–871.
22. Gualeni, B., Facchini, M., De Leonardis, F., Tenni, R., Cetta, G.,
Viola, M., Passi, A., Superti-Furga, A., Forlino, A. and Rossi, A.
(2010) Defective proteoglycan sulfation of the growth plate
zones causes reduced chondrocyte proliferation via an al-
tered Indian hedgehog signalling. Matrix Biol., 29, 453–460.
2 3 . K o m o s i n s k a - V a s s e v ,K . ,B l a t ,D . ,O l c z y k ,P . ,S z e r e m e t a ,A . ,
Jura-Poltorak, A., Winsz-Szczotka, K., Klimek, K. and Olczyk,
K. (2014) Urinary glycosaminoglycan (uGAG) excretion in
healthy pediatric and adolescent population. Clin. Biochem.,
9120, 00406–00408.
24. Karousou, E., Asimakopoulou, A., Monti, L., Zafeiropoulou, V.,
Afratis, N., Gartaganis, P., Rossi, A., Passi, A. and Karamanos,
N.K. (2014) FACE analysis as a fast and reliable methodology
to monitor the sulfation and total amount of chondroitin sul-
fate in biological samples of clinical importance. Molecules ,
19, 7959–7980.
25.
Helenius, I., Remes, V., Lohman, M., Tallroth, K., Poussa, M.,
Helenius, M. and Paavilainen, T. (2003) Total knee arthro-
plasty in patients with diastrophic dysplasia. J. Bone Joint
Surg. Am., 85-A, 2097–2102.
26. Maeda, K., Miyamoto, Y., Sawai, H., Karniski, L.P., Nakashima,
E., Nishimura, G. and Ikegawa, S. (2006) A compound hetero-
zygote harboring novel and recurrent DTDST mutations with
intermediate phenotype between atelosteogenesis type II
and diastrophic dysplasia. A m .J .M e d .G e n e t .A , 140,
1143–1147.
27. Okiyoneda, T., Veit, G., Dekkers, J.F., Bagdany, M., Soya, N., Xu,
H., Roldan, A., Verkman, A.S., Kurth, M., Simon, A. et al. (2013)
Mechanism-based corrector combination restores DeltaF508-
CFTR folding and function. Nat. Chem. Biol. , 9, 444–454.
28. Canto, M.J., Buixeda, M., Palau, J. and Ojeda, F. (2007) Early
ultrasonographic diagnosis of diastrophic dysplasia at 12
weeks of gestation in a fetus without previous family history.
Prenat. Diagn., 27, 976–978.
29. Wiest, D.B., Chang, E., Fanning, D., Garner, S., Cox, T. and Jen-
kins, D.D. (2014) Antenatal pharmacokinetics and placental
transfer of N-acetylcysteine in chorioamnionitis for fetal
neuroprotection. J. Pediatr., 165, 672–677.e2.
30. De Leonardis, F., Monti, L., Gualeni, B., Tenni, R., Forlino, A.
and Rossi, A. (2014) Altered signaling in the G1 phase deregu-
lates chondrocyte growth in a mouse model with proteogly-
can undersulfation. J. Cell. Biochem. , 115, 1779–1786.
31. Cortes, M., Baria, A.T. and Schwartz, N.B. (2009) Sulfation of
chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans is necessary for proper
Indian hedgehog signaling in the developing growth plate.
Development, 136, 1697–1706.
32. Atkuri, K.R., Mantovani, J.J. and Herzenberg, L.A. (2007)
N-acetylcysteine — a safe antidote for cysteine/glutathione
deﬁciency. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. , 7, 355–359.
33. Stone, J.E. (1998) Urine analysis in the diagnosis of mucopoly-
saccharide disorders. Ann. Clin. Biochem. , 35, 207–225.
34. Mitsuhashi, H., Tsukada, Y., Ono, K., Yano, S. and Naruse, T.
(1993) Urine glycosaminoglycans and heparan sulfate excre-
tions in adult patients with glomerular diseases. Clin.
Nephrol., 39, 231–238.
35. Sindelka, G., Skrha, J., Stibor, V. and Stolba, P. (1993) Glycosa-
minoglycans in urine of type 1 diabetic patients. Sb Lek., 94,
77–80.
36. Mavrikakis, M.E., Kontoyannis, D., Karli, J., Kittas, C., Giagia-
kou, E., Moulopoulou, A. and Koutras, D.A. (1989) Glycosami-
noglycans in urine, articular and periarticular tissues in
streptozotocin diabetes in rats. Endocrinol. Exp., 23, 295–304.
Human Molecular Genetics, 2015, Vol. 24, No. 19 | 5579
 at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries on October 8, 2015http://hmg.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 
37. Luikart, S.D., Fosdick, L., Ogle, K.M., Peterson, B.A. and Bloom-
ﬁeld, C.D. (1989) Serum and ur ine glycosaminoglycans in
myeloid leukemia and myelodysplasia. Leukemia, 3,4 8–50.
38. Thiele, H., Sakano, M., Kitagawa, H., Sugahara, K., Rajab, A.,
Hohne, W., Ritter, H., Leschik, G., Nurnberg, P. and Mundlos,
S. (2004) Loss of chondroitin 6-O-sulfotransferase-1 function
results in severe human chondrodysplasia with progressive
spinal involvement. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA , 101, 10155–
10160.
39. Ferin, R., Pavao, M.L. and Baptista, J. (2012) Methodology for a
rapid and simultaneous determination of total cysteine,
homocysteine, cysteinylglycine and glutathione in plasma
by isocratic RP-HPLC. J .C h r o m a t o g r .BA n a l .T e c h n o l .B i o m e d .
Life Sci., 911,1 5–20.
5580 | Human Molecular Genetics, 2015, Vol. 24, No. 19
 at University of Nebraska-Lincoln Libraries on October 8, 2015http://hmg.oxfordjournals.org/Downloaded from 