
=== PAGE 1 ===
Ann. Anim. Sci., Vol. 22, No. 2 (2022) 613–623 DOI: 10.2478/aoas-2021-0075
Under the appropriate nutritional and environmental 
conditions in which the pregnant female is found, the 
genetic and phenotypic characteristics of the fetus are 
preserved in the prenatal period (So and Ng, 2005). The 
influence of various endogenous and exogenous factors 
on the structural and functional development of organs 
and entire systems depends on the genetic sensitivity and 
the current period of fetal development as well as the 
status health of the pregnant female. As a result of pro-
gramming, there is a permanent change in the regulation 
processes of the metabolic pathways (Matthews, 2001; 
Bertram and Hanson, 2002). As a result of programming, 
the metabolic pathways are permanently changed, and 
the process of adaptation to the new developmental con-
ditions of the fetus must be as quick and efficient as pos-
sible, so as not to disturb the entire development of the 
organism. The effects obtained as a result of the prenatal 
programming consist in accelerating or inhibiting the de-
velopment, and somatic and hormonal maturity, which 
then determine the degree of independence in the post-
natal period (Blicharski et al., 2017; Tomaszewska et al., 
2020, 2021). This is especially important at the time of 
weaning when there is once again a change in the feeding 
form. First, the fetus was nourished by the mother, then 
the newborn was fed with liquid food, and the next pe-
riod like weaning the digestive system must adapt to the 
intake, digestion and utilization of nutrients from solid 
food. Therefore, the question of the extent to which the 
metabolic processes and the structure of the intestinal 
epithelium can be modulated to avoid disturbances in the 
Prenatal Programming of the small intestine in Piglets: the effect  
of suPPlementation with 3-hydroxy-3-methylbutyric acid (hmb) in Pregnant 
sows on the structure of jejunum of their offsPring*
Ewa Tomaszewska1♦, Łukasz Prost1, Piotr Dobrowolski2, Deepesh K.P. Chand1, Janine Donaldson3, Anna Czech4, Renata Klebaniuk5,  
Julia Fabjanowska5, Siemowit Muszyński6
 1Department of Animal Physiology, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Akademicka 12, 20-950 Lublin, Poland
2Department of Functional Anatomy and Cytobiology, Maria Curie-Sklodowska University, Akademicka 19, 20-033 Lublin, Poland
3School of Physiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, 7 York Road, Parktown, Johannesburg, 2193, South Africa
4Department of Biochemistry and Toxicology, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Akademicka 13, 20-950 Lublin, Poland
5Institute of Animal Nutrition and Bromatology, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Akademicka 13, 20-950 Lublin, Poland
6Department of Biophysics, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Akademicka 13, 20-950 Lublin, Poland
♦Corresponding author: ewaRST@interia.pl
abstract
when discussing the scale of the occurrence of diseases of the digestive system in farm animals, particularly pigs in the weaning period, 
it may be beneficial to study physiological and nutritional factors that could potentially affect the growth, development, and modelling of 
the structure and function of the digestive tract. Taking into account the reports on the beneficial effects of ß-hydroxy-ß-methylbutyrate 
(hmb) administration in the prenatal period on the development of various systems it was assumed that the hmb supplementation to 
pregnant sows can influence intestinal development in the offspring during weaning. Thus, the present experiment was conducted to 
evaluate the effect of hmb treatment of pregnant sows on jejunum development in offspring at weaning. from 70th day until the 90th 
day of gestation, sows received either a basal diet (n = 12) or the same diet supplemented with hmb (n = 12) at the dose of 0.2 g/kg of 
body weight/day. HMB given during prenatal time reduced the thickness of the longitudinal muscle; the apoptotic cell index in epithe -
lium also significantly decreased after the HMB supplementation. Vasoactive intestinal (poly)peptide (VIP) expression in submucosal 
ganglia significantly increases in prenatally HMB treated piglets. The same strong reaction was observed with the expression of occludin, 
claudin-3, e-cadherin, and leptin in the jejunal epithelium. the obtained results indicate that the administration of hmb to pregnant 
sows significantly influenced the expression of VIP, leptin and some proteins of the intestinal barrier of their offspring less influencing 
the basal morphology.
Key words: offspring, pigs, pregnancy, weaning, hmb
*This work was supported by statutory research of the Department of Animal Physiology, University of Life Sciences in Lublin,  
no. WKF/S/32/2020.
614
E. Tomaszewska et al.
digestive system during weaning, which are especially 
observed in pig rearing, become important (Nowak et al., 
2021).
In recent years, the effects of nutritional program-
ming of various systems have been intensively studied. 
The nutritional factors can be toxic or they can improve 
the growth and development of the whole organism and 
individual systems, including digestive or skeletal sys-
tems (Tomaszewska et al., 2014; Blicharski et al., 2017; 
Duan et al., 2019; Tomaszewska et al., 2019, 2020; Do-
browolski et al., 2021; Tomczyk-Warunek et al., 2021). 
There is one study, which showed the important role of 
branched-chain amino acids in the biosynthesis of pro-
teins that enable proper development and adaptation of 
the intestines in the postnatal period (Mou et al., 2019).
ß-hydroxy-ß-methylbutyrate (HMB) is an endog-
enous metabolite of leucine, an essential amino acid, 
which shows anabolic and anticatabolic action, inhibits 
the breakdown of proteins and protects muscles from 
damage. It is produced naturally when leucine is oxidized 
in the cell cytoplasm, mainly in the liver and muscles (Ni-
ssen and Abumrad, 1997; Nissen et al., 2000; Lis et al., 
2014). Administration of HMB to sows during pregnancy 
increases milk’s fat content, the birth weight of piglets, 
and has a positive effect on the development of the skel-
etal system in the offspring (Flummer and Theil, 2012; 
Blicharski et al., 2017; Tomaszewska et al., 2018, 2019; 
Tomczyk-Warunek et al., 2021), increases the concentra-
tion of growth hormone and the activity of the bone alka-
line phosphatase as a specific marker of bone formation 
processes in newborns, which in turn lead to the increase 
of the bone mass tissue (Tatara et al., 2007; Blicharski 
et al., 2017; Tomaszewska et al., 2019). Research results 
also show that administering HMB to lactating sows in-
creases the energy and immunological value of milk and 
colostrum and increases the fat content of milk (Nissen 
et al., 1994).
The most common health problem in swine hus-
bandry besides clostridial infection and coccidiosis is 
Escherichia coli (E. coli ) infection called colibacillosis,  
a disease of the small intestine. It is a disease affecting 
both indoor and outdoor herds, can occur both chronically 
and sporadically. E. coli can have many clinical presenta-
tions in pigs of various age groups: diarrhea in suckling 
piglets, neurological signs in nursery pigs or urinary tract 
infections in sows. The known treatment of colibacillo -
sis is the use of commonly available antibiotics (Francis, 
1999). Thus, the prevalence of diseases of the digestive 
system and its dysfunction, especially during weaning, 
are associated with very high treatment costs and eco-
nomic losses in animal husbandry (Xiong et al., 2019). 
The best way to prevent infection is providing a clean 
and dry environment for the piglets or sows` vaccination 
before farrowing. In the case of post-weaning diarrhoea, 
the prevention can be done by the supplementation of an-
timicrobials factors in the first nursery diet to neonatal 
piglets (Luppi, 2017). Nowadays, there is concern over 
the increased phenomenon of antimicrobial resistance 
among bacteria isolated from production animals. The 
risk linked to this phenomenon increases if antimicrobi -
als (antibiotics or zinc oxide) are used inappropriately 
(Luppi, 2017). This is a challenge to find a new and ef-
fective way to prevent digestive system dysfunction. The 
scale of the occurrence of diseases of the digestive system 
in farm animals, including pigs in the weaning period, is 
an important need to study a set of physiological and nu-
tritional factors that may potentially affect the growth, de-
velopment, modelling of the structure and functioning of 
the digestive tract. However, there are no satisfactory data 
on the influence of HMB on the prenatal formation of the 
structure of the small intestine in pigs.
Taking into account the reports on the beneficial ef-
fects of HMB administration in the prenatal period on the 
development of various systems, including the skeletal 
system and striated skeletal muscles, it was decided to 
verify the hypothesis about the possibility of increasing 
the degree of intestinal development in the offspring dur-
ing weaning by the HMB supplementation of pregnant 
sows. 
To verify the above hypothesis, an experiment was 
carried out to evaluate the effect of prenatal administra -
tion of HMB in the diet of a pregnant sow on the postna-
tal development of the gastrointestinal tract in domestic 
pigs, with particular emphasis on the jejunum. In doing 
so, the present study examined (i) the integrity of intes-
tinal barrier and basal morphology as well as the expres-
sion of selected hormones, and (ii) the effects of HMB 
supplementation. Thus, changes in immunoexpression 
and immunolocalization of vasoactive intestinal (poly)
peptide and leptin were studied after HMB supplemen -
tation. Together, these results should provide additional 
fundamental information on the outcomes of HMB sup-
plementation to pregnant sows, in relation to the small 
intestinal development of their offspring.
material and methods
ethical approval
All experimental procedures were approved by The 
Local Ethics Committee on Animal Experimentation of 
the University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Poland and 
complied with the Directive 2010/63/EU of the Euro-
pean Parliament and of the Council on the protection of 
animals used for scientific purposes. Throughout the ex-
perimental period, the health status of pregnant sows and 
piglets was regularly monitored by a veterinarian.
Animals, breeding and experimental design
The study was performed on 24 piglets born by 12 
clinically healthy sows of the Polish Large White breed. 
Sows were sired by the same boar. Sows were singly 
housed in separated cages under standard rearing con-
ditions (controlled temperature, humidity and 12:12-h 
light-dark cycle) with free access to fresh water and fed 
an amount of 3.0 kg of feed mixture per sow during late 

=== PAGE 2 ===
615
Maternal dietary HMB alters jejunal structure in offspring
gestation with a balanced standard commercial diet for 
pregnant and lactating sows commonly used (Grela and 
Skomial, 2015). The feed mixture used for sows during 
pregnancy and lactation contained in 1 kg: 13.2 MJ ME, 
162 g of crude protein, 9.5 g of lysine and the scheme 
of the main essential amino acids proportion was lysine 
100%: methionine+cysteine 60%: threonine 65%: tryp-
tophan 22%. A two-phase feeding system for pregnant 
sows was introduced and the composition and amounts 
of feed were controlled in each phase of gestation.
Primiparous sows were used in the control and exper-
imental groups to avoid the effect of the number of preg-
nancies on the birth weight in the offspring. The sows in 
both groups were ca. 10 months old and mated during the 
third oestrus. 
To investigate the effects of prenatal treatment 
with a leucine metabolite on cartilage, β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate (HMB; Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) was 
administered to sows in mid-pregnancy. The sows were 
randomly assigned into two weight and age-matched 
groups (6 sows in each group). The sows were fed 
with a standard diet (control) and a diet supplemented 
with HMB (0.2 g/kg of body weight/every day) in the 
morning meals from the 70th to 90th day of gestation.  
The dose of HMB was determined from a previous study, 
where we used HMB in a dose of 0.2 g/kg/every day  
and a significant effect on enamel surface develop-
ment of the offspring was found at this dose (Świetlicka  
et al., 2016; Tomaszewska et al., 2018). The gestation 
length did not differ between the control and HMB-treat-
ed sows.
All piglets born by physiological partum had no con-
genital changes. There were no stillbirths. Females and 
males used in the study were treated in the same man-
ner. Piglets born by sows fed the control diet belonged 
to the control group of males (n=6) and females (n=6), 
and piglets born by HMB-treated sows belonged to the 
HMB group of males (n=6) and females (n=6). All off-
spring were held with their mothers without translocation 
between sows and fed naturally with colostrum and then 
with sow’s milk, then at the age of 35 days, randomly 
chosen piglets were euthanized by intravenous injections 
of lethal doses of pentobarbitalum natrium (Morbital, 
Biowet, Puławy, Poland). 
tissue collection and histomorphometry analysis
Ten mm long segments of the jejunum (50% of the 
total intestinal length of the jejunum) were taken from 
each piglet. Tissues were fixed in 4% buffered formal-
dehyde (pH 7.0) for 24 h, dehydrated in a graded series 
of ethanol, cleared with a nonpolar solvent, and then em-
bedded in paraffin. 4 μm thick cross-sections were cut 
with a microtome (Microm HM 360, Walldorf, Germa-
ny), then placed on one microscopic slide (Polysine™, 
Menzel Glaser, Braunschweig, Germany). For histomor-
phometry analysis, slides were stained with Masson’s 
trichrome (Suvarna et al., 2013) and observed using  
a CX43 (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) microscope. Collected 
microscopic images were examined blindly by an associ-
ate who was not aware of the treatment using graphical 
analysis software: Olympus cellSens (Olympus, Tokyo, 
Japan) and ImageJ (Schneider et al., 2012). 
The following morphometric parameters were ana-
lyzed: the thickness of mucosa, submucosa, external 
muscular layer, and villar epithelium; enterocyte num-
ber; the number of villi, active and inactive crypts; villus 
length and thickness; crypt depth and width; area of the 
small intestine absorptive surface (Dobrowolski et al., 
2021). For enteric ganglia (myenteric and submucosal), 
the following morphometric parameters were analyzed: 
the cross-section area, the perimeter, and circularity. The 
measurements of each variable were made on three sepa-
rate tissue sections, on at least ten different areas of each 
section. The measurements were then averaged and ex-
pressed as the mean value of calculated parameters for 
each piglet. 
immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical staining was performed ac-
cording to the protocols provided by the producer of the 
antibodies (Abcam, Cambridge, UK). Following primary 
antibodies were used: rabbit polyclonal anti-Ki67 anti -
body (ab15580); mouse monoclonal anti-neurofilament 
heavy (poly)peptide antibody to localize myenteric and 
submucosal ganglia (ab187374); mouse monoclonal anti-
active caspase-3 (ab208161); rabbit polyclonal anti-VIP 
(ab22736), rabbit polyclonal anti-claudin-3 (ab15102), 
rabbit polyclonal anti-E-cadherin (ab15148), rabbit 
polyclonal anti-occludin (ab222691); rabbit polyclonal 
anti-leptin (ab16227, Abcam, Cambridge, UK, dilution 
1:200), rabbit monoclonal anti-CD3 (ab16669). The im-
munoreaction was verified with the negative controls, 
treated by identical immunohistochemical staining, ex-
cluding the application of the primary antibody (Hułas-
Stasiak et al., 2020).
Microscopic images were subjected to further analy -
sis. For Ki-67 and claudin-3, the proliferating and apop-
totic cell indexes (the per cent of proliferating or apoptot-
ic cells in relation to all the gland cells) were determined 
respectively. For neurofilament detection the cross-sec-
tional area of the nerve ganglion; sphericity, perimeter, 
the minimal and mean diameter of the ganglion and mean 
Feret diameter (the distance between the two tangential 
lines restricting the object perpendicular to that direction) 
were determined using ImageJ software.
The intensity of immunoexpression was measured 
both by determining the percentage of cells with a posi-
tive response and by the quantitative comparison of mean 
pixel intensity in the photomicrographs, which were first-
ly converted into negatives and then into 8-bit grey-scale 
digital images, with a scale from 0 (white pixel) to 255 
(black pixel), where the higher the pixel value, the higher 
the intensity of the immunohistochemical reaction. The 
intensity of the immunoreaction in each of the analyzed 
digital images was measured in 10 randomly selected ar-
eas of the positive signal. The analyses were done blindly 
616
E. Tomaszewska et al.
by an associate who was not aware of the treatment using 
ImageJ software.
statistical analysis
Data are presented as means ± standard deviation. In 
all analyses, the single pig was considered as an experi-
mental unit. A Shapiro-Wilk normality test was applied 
to test the normality of the data; the homogeneity of vari-
ances was assessed using Levene’s test. Normally distrib-
uted variables were analyzed using a two-tailed Student's 
t-test or t-test with Welch’s correction when normally 
distributed data lack equal variances; non-parametric 
data were analyzed using a Mann-Whitney U test. For 
all tests, a P-value < 0.05 was established as statistically 
significant. All statistical procedures were performed us-
ing Statistica 13.0 (Tibco, Palo Alto, CA, USA) software.
results
jejunal morphology
No macroscopic changes indicating an anastomotic 
failure or infection were found during dissection. The 
analysis of basal morphology of the jejunal wall showed 
that HMB given during prenatal time reduced the thick -
ness of the outer layer of muscularis, which led to the re-
duction of the total thickness of muscularis in piglets. The 
number of apoptotic cells also significantly decreased af-
ter the HMB supplementation (Table 1). Other changes 
were not observed. The analysis of basal morphology of 
jejunal villi showed the lack of the effect of the prenatal 
HMB supplementation in piglets (Table 2). Taking into 
account the basal morphology of piglets’ jejunal crypts, 
there was observed a decrease of the depth after the pre-
natal HMB supplementation (Table 3). The size and ge-
ometry of both ganglia were unchanged (Table 4). 
Immunolocalization and immunoexpression of 
VIP 
Immunolocalisation of vasoactive intestinal (poly)
peptide (VIP) showed that VIP immune reactive cells 
were observed in both the myenteric and submucosal 
ganglia in the control and HMB groups. The intensity of 
immune reaction was significantly higher in myenteric 
ganglia in the control group compared with the HMB 
group, while VIP expression in submucosal ganglia was 
very strong in prenatally HMB treated piglets compared 
with the control piglets (Figure 1).
Table 1. The effect of HMB on basal morphology of intestinal wall of piglets at the age of 35 days
Item Control HMB P-value
Mucosa thickness (µm) 593±122 565±96 n.s.
Submucosa thickness (µm) 38.3±12.2 39.0±16.3 n.s.
Thickness of inner muscle layer (µm) 57.0±11.2 54.5±8.5 n.s.
Thickness of outer muscle layer (µm) 47.2±8.6 26.0±8.1 ***
Total thickness of muscularis (µm) 106.6±9.12 79.7±9.5 ***
Muscle to mucosa thickness ratio 0.18±0.08 0.14±0.09 n.s.
Absorption surface (mm2) 6.17±1.49 6.58±2.23 n.s.
Apoptotic cells index (%) 11.79±2.21 9.32±1.97 **
Ki index (%) 52.7±15.6 54.8±16.8 n.s.
CD3 number (/mm2) 874±368 537±295 n.s.
Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 12). Significance was established using a two-tailed Student’s t-test (normally distributed data), 
Welch’s test (normally distributed data with unequal variances) or Mann–Whitney test (for pairwise comparisons with at least one non-normally distributed 
dataset); n.s. – not significant; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001.
Table 2. The effect of HMB on basal morphology of intestinal villus of piglets at the age of 35 days
Item Control HMB P-value
Villi length (µm) 304±68 302±95 n.s.
Villi width (µm) 88.8±21.1 98.0±19.7 n.s.
Total number of villi/mm 14.3±2.08 7.27±1.85 n.s.
Number of undamaged villi/mm 1.73±1.07 0.81±1.17 n.s.
Number of damaged villi/mm 6.39±1.91 6.43±4.15 n.s.
Enterocytes thickness (µm) 26.8±4.2 24.5±3.5 n.s.
Villus/crypt ratio 2.53±1.21 2.22±1.23 n.s.
Enterocytes number/100 µm 16.9±4.7 22.4±9.7 n.s.
Number of goblet cells/100 µm 0.93±1.12 1.44±1.41 n.s.
Enterocytes to goblet cells ratio 18.21±4.20 15.17±6.57 n.s.
Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 12). Significance was established using a two-tailed Student’s t-test (normally distributed data), 
Welch’s test (normally distributed data with unequal variances) or Mann–Whitney test (for pairwise comparisons with at least one non-normally distributed 
dataset); n.s. – not significant.

=== PAGE 3 ===
617
Maternal dietary HMB alters jejunal structure in offspring
Immunolocalization and immunoexpression of 
proteins of intestinal barrier
The expression of occludin, an integral plasma-
membrane protein located at the tight junctions, was of 
lower intensity in the control group, irrespective it was 
analyzed across the whole epithelium or including sep-
arately crypts and villi. The analysis across the epithe -
lium showed that the intensity of the immune reaction 
was stronger in crypts comparing with villi in the control 
group. It was not observed in the HMB group, where the 
occluding intensity was similar in both parts analyzed. 
Moreover, a stronger intensity of the occludin expression 
was generally in the HMB group irrespective of the part 
analyzed (Figure 2).
The expression of claudin-3, another integral plas-
ma-membrane protein located at the tight junctions and 
serving as a physical barrier to prevent solutes and wa-
ter from passing freely through the paracellular space, 
showed that claudin-3 was present in both groups along 
the whole epithelium, but the significantly stronger reac-
tion was in the HMB group comparing with the control 
group irrespective of the part analyzed (Figure 3).
The expression of E-cadherin, a type of cell adhe-
sion molecule (CAM) that are important in the forma-
tion of adherens junctions to bind cells with each oth-
er, showed that E-cadherin also was present along the 
whole epithelium in both groups of piglets. Taking into 
account the control group, the reaction was stronger in 
crypts comparing with villi, while in the HMB group 
the reaction was similar in both parts of the epithe-
lium. Further, immunoexpression of E-cadherin was 
significantly stronger, irrespective of the part analy-  
zed in the HMB group than in the control group (Fi-  
gure 4).
The expression of leptin, a hormone involved in the 
regulation of energy balance through the inhibition of 
hunger, is presented in the jejunum in the control and 
HMB groups of piglets in Figure 5. A stronger immune 
reaction of leptin was observed in the crypts, epithelium 
villi and both ganglia of enteric nervous system in the 
HMB group. Taking into account the whole epithelium, 
this reaction also was stronger in the HMB group com-
paring to the control group.
Table 3. The effect of HMB on basal morphology of intestinal crypts of piglets at the age of 35 days
Item Control HMB P-value
Crypts depth (µm) 120±15.6 93.5±13.8 ***
Crypts width (µm) 33.3±13.7 44.6±15.9 n.s.
Total number of crypts/mm 15.9±3.5 15.8±3.6 n.s.
Number of open crypts/mm 1.91±1.81 1.55±1.60 n.s.
Number of closed crypts/mm 13.6±3.7 14.7±3.9 n.s.
Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 12). Significance was established using a two-tailed Student’s t-test (normally distributed data), 
Welch’s test (normally distributed data with unequal variances) or Mann–Whitney test (for pairwise comparisons with at least one non-normally distributed 
dataset); n.s. – not significant; ***P<0.001.
Table 4. The effect of HMB on basal morphology of intestinal ganglia of piglets at the age of 35 days
Item Control HMB P-value
Myenteric ganglion
The cross-section area (µm2) 1624±1385 906±639 n.s.
Perimeter (µm) 196±123 161±81 n.s.
Circularity 0.22±0.17 0.25±0.24 n.s.
Submucosal ganglion
The cross-section area (µm2) 988±622 928±815 n.s.
Perimeter (µm) 162±77 149±85 n.s.
Circularity 0.21±0.25 0.24±0.22 n.s.
Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (n = 12). Significance was established using a two-tailed Student’s t-test (normally distributed data), 
Welch’s test (normally distributed data with unequal variances) or Mann–Whitney test (for pairwise comparisons with at least one non-normally distributed 
dataset); n.s. – not significant.
618
E. Tomaszewska et al.
Figure 1. Representative photomicrographs of the immunohistochemical reactions for vasoactive intestinal (poly)peptide (VIP) in the myenteric 
and submucosal ganglia in jejunum of control and prenatally HMB-exposed pigs. All the scale bars represent 40 um. Bar graphs show the intensity 
of expression of VIP in ganglia measured by the comparison of the pixel brightness value in the microscopic images converted to 8-bit grayscale 
– the higher the pixel value, the higher the intensity of the immunohistochemical reaction. Graph shows mean ± standard deviation. Significance 
was established using a two-tailed Student’s t-test (normally distributed data), Welch’s test (normally distributed data with unequal variances) or 
Mann-Whitney test (for pairwise comparisons with at least one non-normally distributed dataset); ***P< 0.001
Figure 2. Representative photomicrographs of the immunohistochemical reactions for occludin in the epithelium, crypts and villi in jejunum of 
control and prenatally HMB-exposed pigs. All the scale bars represent 100 um. Bar graphs show the intensity of expression of occludin in intesti-
nal areas measured by the comparison of the pixel brightness value in the microscopic images converted to 8-bit grayscale – the higher the pixel 
value, the higher the intensity of the immunohistochemical reaction. Graph shows mean ± standard deviation. Significance was established using 
a two-tailed Student’s t-test (normally distributed data), Welch’s test (normally distributed data with unequal variances) or Mann-Whitney test (for 
pairwise comparisons with at least one non-normally distributed dataset); ***P< 0.001


=== PAGE 4 ===
619
Maternal dietary HMB alters jejunal structure in offspring
Figure 3. Representative photomicrographs of the immunohistochemical reactions for claudin-3 in the epithelium, crypts and villi in jejunum 
of control and prenatally HMB-exposed pigs. All the scale bars represent 100 um. Bar graphs show the intensity of expression of claudin-3 in 
intestinal areas measured by the comparison of the pixel brightness value in the microscopic images converted to 8-bit grayscale – the higher the 
pixel value, the higher the intensity of the immunohistochemical reaction. Graph shows mean ± standard deviation. Significance was established 
using a two-tailed Student’s t-test (normally distributed data), Welch’s test (normally distributed data with unequal variances) or Mann-Whitney 
test (for pairwise comparisons with at least one non-normally distributed dataset); *P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001
Figure 4. Representative photomicrographs of the immunohistochemical reactions for E-cadherin in the crypts and villi in jejunum of control 
and prenatally HMB-exposed pigs. All the scale bars represent 100 um. Bar graphs show the intensity of expression of E-cadherin in the jejunal 
epithelium, crypts and villi measured by the comparison of the pixel brightness value in the microscopic images converted to 8-bit grayscale – 
the higher the pixel value, the higher the intensity of the immunohistochemical reaction. Graph shows mean ± standard deviation. Significance 
was established using a two-tailed Student’s t-test (normally distributed data), Welch’s test (normally distributed data with unequal variances) or 
Mann-Whitney test (for pairwise comparisons with at least one non-normally distributed dataset); *P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001
620
E. Tomaszewska et al.
discussion
The postnatal development of all organisms depends 
primarily on genes. However, as it was shown by studies 
conducted on various species of animals, the postnatal 
development of an organism is also determined in the 
prenatal time by non-genetic factors (Hales et al., 1991; 
Blicharski et al., 2017; Tomaszewska et al., 2018). Im-
portant factors that largely determine the proper prena-
tal development are the nutrients present in the diet of 
a pregnant female (Czech et al., 2020). Nutrients can be 
different, they can be basic nutrients playing a building, 
energy or regulatory role, and non-nutrients, such as tox-
ic substances (Tomaszewska et al., 2014, 2020; Rudyk et 
al., 2020). 
Supplements are among the nutrients that can be 
found in a pregnant female’s diet. However, knowledge 
about the effects of most supplements on the nutrition 
of pregnant females is incomplete (Tomaszewska et al., 
2018; Milart et al., 2019). The action of all these factors 
may have positive effects or inhibit the overall develop -
ment of offspring’s organism. This effect is observed not 
only with body weight and bone tissue but also in the 
digestive system, which largely determines the survival 
rate, animal health and production effects. All processes 
related to food intake, digestion and grinding, utilization 
and removal of undigested remains dependent on the de-
gree of development of the digestive system in the prena-
tal period. The digestive tract is also the first place where 
an individual comes into contact with allergens and path-
ogens. Therefore, it should be remembered that the func-
tional and structural preparation of the gastrointestinal 
tract to perform all these functions takes place already 
in the prenatal period. Mou et al. (2019) presented the 
role of branched amino acids not only in general growth 
but also in proteosynthesis of the visceral tissue of the 
internal organs, possibly due to the holistic growth of the 
organism exposed to HMB/leucine. 
The current study was focused on the structural adap-
tation of the small intestine in offspring from sows sup-
plemented with HMB. To our knowledge, there are no 
studies on pregnant sows supplemented with HMB with 
regards to the postnatal development of the gastrointesti-
nal tract in pigs. For this reason, it is difficult to directly 
Figure 5. Representative photomicrographs of the immunohistochemical reactions for leptin in the ganglia, crypts and villi in jejunum of con -
trol and prenatally HMB-exposed pigs. White arrow shows submucosal ganglion and black arrow shows myenteric ganglion. All the scale bars 
represent 100 um. Bar graphs show the intensity of expression of leptin in the jejunal epithelium, crypts and villi measured by the comparison of 
the pixel brightness value in the microscopic images converted to 8-bit grayscale – the higher the pixel value, the higher the intensity of the im -
munohistochemical reaction. Graph shows mean ± standard deviation. Significance was established using a two-tailed Student’s t-test (normally 
distributed data), Welch’s test (normally distributed data with unequal variances) or Mann–Whitney test (for pairwise comparisons with at least 
one non-normally distributed dataset); ***P< 0.001


=== PAGE 5 ===
621
Maternal dietary HMB alters jejunal structure in offspring
compare and discuss the obtained results in the context 
of the results described in previously conducted studies. 
However, there are a few studies that show that HMB has 
the potential in ameliorating acute intestinal toxicity and 
gastrointestinal injury induced by radiation (Yavas et al., 
2013; Zheng et al., 2020). Zheng et al. (2020) has shown 
that HMB supplementation significantly increased jeju-
nal villus height and in turn elevated the villus height-to-
crypt depth ratio. 
Our study showed very few changes in the basal je-
junal morphology including the reduction of myenteron 
thickness. The intestinal myenteron participates in the 
mixing of chyme and moving it along the digestive tract. 
Based on obtained results it could be assumed that these 
changes will lead to the weakening or strengthening of 
bowel movements and following slowing or acceleration 
of the chyme passage; and what is influence on gener -
ating myoelectric potential. There is another important 
issue, which should be further investigated. It should be 
considered whether the smooth muscle is as susceptible 
to differentiation and growth by activating the mTORC1 
pathway as skeletal muscle. The lack of other changes can 
suggest that the function of the intestine was unaffected 
by the prenatal HMB supplementation. This means that 
both the mucus layer as a part of the mucosal barrier and 
the mucosal barrier by itself remains intact (no change in 
the number of goblet cells), but it does not indicate that 
they are structures that cannot be programmed. Acryla-
mide significantly disrupts both the intestinal barrier and 
the structure of the small intestine in newborn guinea 
pigs as well as HMB in minks when animals are exposed 
to it during the prenatal time (Tomaszewska et al., 2014; 
Dobrowolski et al., 2021). 
The lack of changes in the structures of the intestine, 
in the structure of the villi and crypts, proves (includ -
ing the proliferation index) that HMB administered to  
a pregnant female did not affect the processes of renewal 
and regeneration of the intestinal epithelium or the shape 
of the villi. The number and shape of the villi largely de-
termine the surface of the intestinal mucosa (in the pre-
sented piglets there is no change in the absorption sur -
face), which in turn determines the processes of digestion 
and absorption. Changing the shape of the villi, e.g. from 
finger-like shape to leafy, can already cause a significant 
reduction in the surface of the intestinal mucosa. The 
epithelium that covers the intestinal mucosa is constantly 
renewed and regenerated. The site of renewal is the in-
testinal crypts (no changes in the jejunum in piglets after 
HMB), from which cells, as a result of divisions, move 
along the lateral surface of the villi towards the top of 
the villi, where they are exfoliated. Maintaining the cor -
rect shape and size of the villi depends on the dynamic 
balance between the renewal and exfoliation processes, 
which was not probably disturbed in piglets prenatally 
exposed to HMB. Therefore, it should be assumed that 
HMB supplementation did not disturb the proliferation 
and exfoliation in any way, nor did it intensify or inhibit 
the mentioned processes. The observed lack of influ-
ence is a very good effect because the renewal processes 
are very intense and the action of any factor may cause  
a change in the rate of any of the described processes 
and affect the shape and size of the intestinal villi. For 
example, the lack of nutrients inhibits exfoliation, and on 
the other hand, increased exfoliation, even when the pro-
cesses of cell proliferation and migration are too intense, 
which may turn out to be insufficient for reconstruction, 
can lead to villi atrophy. Moreover, the current study 
showed a decrease in the apoptosis process, which is also 
described in skeletal muscles (Hao et al., 2011).
Administration of HMB to pregnant sows also had 
a positive effect on the small intestine barrier. The gut-
epithelial barrier consists of a complex system of protein-
protein networks linking the contiguous cell and closing 
the intercellular space. These zones are impermeable to 
macromolecular substances and are generally more per -
meable in the small intestine compared to the rest of the 
intestine. The performed immunohistochemical reactions 
towards the expression of claudin-3, the tight junction 
zone protein as well as the expression of E-cadherin, the 
adhesion zone protein of the adherens junction, show that 
the endothelial cells of the piglet’s mucosa show greater 
coherence, leading to an increase in the tight junction of 
the intestinal barrier. 
The impermeability of the intestinal epithelium due 
to the presence of closing edges or adhesion between 
enterocytes together with the mucous barrier is one of 
the elements of the non-cellular non-specific immune re-
sponse. Improving the structure of the intestinal barrier 
may reduce inflammation or cancer processes later in life 
when the living organism is in particularly unfavourable 
environmental conditions with a changed nutritional pro-
file (weaning or changing the diet or environment). Ab-
sorption in the small intestine occurs in two ways. One 
route is through transcellular uptake through enterocyte 
structures. The second route is intracellular absorption 
through proteins that connect adjacent intestinal epithe -
lial cells. The damage of the intestinal epithelium and the 
mucosa barrier involved the presence of zonulin-depend-
ent changes in gut-epithelial and gut-vascular barriers 
and makes it possible for bacteria and bacterial toxins 
to enter, and the depletion of the intestinal bacterial flora 
increases the susceptibility of the mucosa to pathogens, 
their metabolites and other inflammatory signals, lead -
ing to intestinal dysbiosis and reduction of positive local 
and general immune response (Groschwitz and Hogan, 
2009).
Another important effect observed in the current study 
is the change of the VIP expression in the enteric nervous 
system after the HMB maternal supplementation. VIP is 
extensively distributed in central and peripheral tissues, 
where it acts as a neurotransmitter and neuromodula -
tor. VIP has several actions in the periphery, including 
vascular and non-vascular smooth muscle relaxation, 
vasodilatation and electrolyte secretion. It stimulates the 
secretion of water, bicarbonate, bile, pepsinogen; and has 
also been shown to possess both anti-inflammatory and 
622
E. Tomaszewska et al.
anti-apoptotic properties (Gonzalez-Rey and Delgado,  
2005).
Thus, from the point of view of that anti-inflammato-
ry VIP property, its potential role in the pathogenesis of 
gastrointestinal diseases cannot be underestimated (Del-
gado et al., 2004). Additionally, it is suggested that VIP 
has antimicrobial, antibacterial, and antifungal proper -
ties. VIP displayed antimicrobial activity against Strepto-
coccus mutans, Lactobacillus acidophilus, Enterococcus 
faecalis, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
Candida albicans (El Karim et al., 2008).
VIP affects blood vessels, suppresses gastric acid 
secretion, stimulates the secretion of pancreatic and in-
testinal juices, water and chlorine ions in the intestines 
(reducing their absorption), relaxes the smooth muscle 
of the gastrointestinal tract, induces glycogenolysis and 
gluconeogenesis in hepatocytes, and also affects immu -
nity (Said, 1991; Bik, 2007; Winzell and Ahrén, 2007). 
In addition, studies conducted on mice prove that VIP 
is involved in the regulation of appetite and satiety, and 
plays a key role in regulating body weight, influencing its 
increase (Vu et al., 2015). 
The current study showed that HMB especially in-
creased the VIP expression in myenteric ganglia. It was 
a possible compensatory mechanism counteracting the 
dramatic decrease of brush border enzyme activity and 
electrolytes secretion in the small intestine at the wean-
ing in pigs. Its higher presence with the connection of 
improved intestinal barrier and anti-inflammatory and 
anti-bacterial properties after the HMB supplementation 
can help to keep a healthy gut (Xiong et al., 2019). More-
over, other studies on several animals have showed that 
VIP expression is changed by the inflammatory process, 
which correlates with altered smooth muscle contractility 
(Arciszewski et al., 2009).
The next important finding of the current study 
was linked with the increase of the expression of leptin 
in the intestinal epithelium. On the other hand, the in-
crease in its concentration in the peripheral blood was 
not observed. Leptin increases the insulin sensitivity of 
peripheral tissues, which increases the glucose reuptake 
(Friedman, 2014). Moreover, leptin is produced physi-
ologically by the intestinal epithelium where plays a role 
of growth factor for the epithelium in the digestive tract 
(Pearson et al., 2001). Leptin is also a hormone that is  
involved in the functioning of the gut-brain axis and af-
fects the body’s energy expenditure (Park and Ahima, 
2014). 
It seems that the HMB use as a factor protecting 
against health problems at weaning in swine production 
could be a good strategy, which can be introduced to 
breeding. A recent study shows that after maternal HMB 
supplementation piglets are heavier at birth and wean-
ing and slaughter (Tatara et al., 2007; Blicharski et al., 
2017). That form of administration reducing the need for 
piglet supplementation in favour of supplementation of 
the pregnant sow is extremely important from the point 
of view of animal welfare. 
The obtained results indicate that the administra -
tion of HMB to pregnant sows significantly influences 
the postnatal development of the small intestine of their 
offspring, but as it can be seen from the presented experi-
ence, it is difficult to clearly explain the phenomenon of 
prenatal programming of the gastrointestinal function at 
this stage. Further studies should be performed to eluci -
date the observed changes in the piglets’ digestive tract. 
Conflict of Interests Statement
The authors declare that they have no conflict of in-
terest regarding the publication of this article.
references
Arciszewski M.B., Nowakowski Z., Wasowicz K., Całka J. (2009). 
Expression of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide, substance P and 
neuropeptide Y in jejunal enteric nerves is altered in rabbits suffer-
ing from long term Trichinella spiralis infection: an immunohisto-
chemical study. Vet. Med., 54: 589597.
Bertram C.E., Hanson M.A. (2002). Prenatal programming of post -
natal endocrine responses by glucocorticoids. Reproduction, 124: 
459467.
Bik W. (2007). Vasoactive intestinal peptide-immunomodulatory 
factor and its role in respiratory diseases (in Polish). Post. Nauk 
Med., 10: 408413. 
Blicharski T., Tomaszewska E., Dobrowolski P., Hułas-Stasiak M., 
Muszyński S. (2017). A metabolite of leucine (β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate) given to sows during pregnancy alters bone de -
velopment of their newborn offspring by hormonal modulation. 
PLoS One, 12: e0179693.
Czech A., Grela R.E., Kiesz M., Kłys S. (2020). Biochemical and hae-
matological blood parameters of sows and piglets fed a diet with 
a dried fermented rapeseed meal. Ann. Anim. Sci., 20: 535–550.
Delgado M., Pozo D., Ganea D. (2004). The significance of vasoac -
tive intestinal peptide in immunomodulation. Pharmacol. Rev., 
56: 249290.
Dobrowolski P., Muszyński S., Donaldson J., Jakubczak A., Żmuda A., 
Taszkun I., Rycerz K., Mielnik-Błaszczak M., Kuc D., Tomasze -
wska E. (2021). The effects of prenatal supplementation with 
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate and/or alpha-ketoglutaric acid on the 
development and maturation of mink intestines are dependent on 
the number of pregnancies and the sex of the offspring. Animals, 
11: 1468. 
Duan Y ., Li F., Song B., Zheng C., Zhong Y ., Xu K., Kong X., Yin Y ., 
Wang W., Shu G. (2019). β-hydroxy-β-methyl butyrate, but not 
α-ketoisocaproate and excess leucine, stimulates skeletal muscle 
protein metabolism in growing pigs fed low protein diets. J. Funct. 
Foods, 52: 34–42.
El Karim I.A., Linden G.J., Orr D.F., Lundy F.T. (2008). Antimicrobial 
activity of neuropeptides against a range of micro-organisms from 
skin, oral, respiratory and gastrointestinal tract sites. J. Neuroim -
munol., 200: 1116. 
Flummer C., Theil P.K. (2012). Effect of β-hydroxy β-methyl butyr -
ate supplementation of sows in late gestation and lactation on 
sow production of colostrum and milk and piglet performance.  
J. Anim. Sci., 90: 372–374.
Francis D.H. (1999). Colibacillosis in pigs and its diagnosis. Swine 
Health Prod., 7: 241244.
Friedman J. (2014). 20 years of leptin: leptin at 20: an overview.  
J. Endocrinol., 223: T1T8.
Gonzalez-Rey E., Delgado M. (2005). Role of vasoactive intestinal 
peptide in inflammation and autoimmunity. Curr. Opin. Investig. 
Drugs., 6: 11161123. 
Grela E.R., Skomiał J. (2015). Nutritional recommendations and nu -
tritional value of feed for pigs, 2nd ed. Institute of Physiology 

=== PAGE 6 ===
623
Maternal dietary HMB alters jejunal structure in offspring
and Animal Nutrition of Polish Academy of Science, Jabłonna, 
Poland, pp. 195.
Groschwitz K.R., Hogan S.P. (2009). Intestinal barrier function: mo -
lecular regulation and disease pathogenesis. J. Allergy Clin. Im -
munol., 124: 320.
Hales C.N., Barker D.J., Clark P.M., Cox L.J., Fall C., Osmond C., 
Winter P.D. (1991). Fetal and infant growth and impaired glucose 
tolerance at age 64. Br. Med. J., 303: 10191022.
Hao Y ., Jackson J.R., Wang Y ., Edens N., Pereira S.L., Alway S.E. 
(2011). β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate reduces myonuclear apop -
tosis during recovery from hind limb suspension-induced muscle 
fiber atrophy in aged rats. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. 
Physiol., 301: R701R715. 
Hułas-Stasiak M., Jakubowicz-Gil J., Dobrowolski P., Grzesiak M., 
Muszyński S., Świątkiewicz M., Tomaszewska E. (2020). Regula-
tion of folliculogenesis by growth factors in piglet ovary exposed 
prenatally to β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB). Ann. Anim. 
Sci., 20: 899–917.
Lis I., Bogdański P., Karolkiewicz J. (2014). The effect of β-hydroxy-
β-methylbutyrate (HMB) on muscle protein metabolism. Farm 
Współ., 7: 3241. 
Luppi A. (2017). Swine enteric colibacillosis: diagnosis, therapy and 
antimicrobial resistance. Porc. Health Manag., 3: 16. 
Matthews S.G. (2001). Antenatal glucocorticoids and the development 
brain: mechanisms of action. Semin Neonatol., 6: 309317.
Milart P., Paluszkiewicz P., Dobrowolski P., Tomaszewska E., 
Smolińska K., Dębińska I., Gaweł K., Walczak K., Bednarski J., 
Turska M., Raban M., Kocki T., Turski W.A. (2019). Kynurenic 
acid as the neglected ingredient of commercial baby formulas. Sci. 
Rep., 9: 6108.
Mou Q., Yang H-S., Yin Y-L., Huang P-F. (2019). Amino acids influ-
encing intestinal development and health of the piglets. Animals, 
9: 302. 
Nissen S., Abumrad N.N. (1997). Nutritional role of the leucine me -
tabolite β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB). J. Nutr. Biochem., 
8: 300311. 
Nissen S., Faidley T.D., Zimmerman D.R., Izard R., Fisher C.T. 
(1994). Colostral milk fat percentage and pig performance are 
enhanced by feeding the leucine metabolite beta-hydroxy-beta-
methyl butyrate to sows. J. Anim. Sci., 72: 2331–2337.
Nissen S., Sharp R.L., Panton L., Vukovich M., Trappe S., Fuller J.C. 
Jr. (2000). Beta-hydroxy-methylbutyrate (HMB) supplementa -
tion in humans is safe and decrease cardiovascular risk factors.  
 J. Nutr., 130: 19371945. 
Nowak P., Zaworska-Zakrzewska A., Frankiewicz A., Kasprowicz-
Potocka M. (2021). The effects and mechanisms of acids on the 
health of piglets and weaners – a review. Ann. Anim. Sci., 21: 
433–455.
Park H.K., Ahima R.S. (2014). Leptin signaling. F1000Prime Rep., 
6: 73.
Pearson P.Y ., O'Connor D.M., Schwartz M.Z. (2001). Novel effect of 
leptin on small intestine adaptation. J. Surg. Res., 97: 192–195.
Rudyk H., Tomaszewska E., Arciszewski M.B., Muszyński S., Tom -
czyk-Warunek A., Dobrowolski P., Donaldson J., Brezvyn O., 
Kotsyumbas I. (2020). Histomorphometrical changes in intestine 
structure and innervation following experimental fumonisins in -
toxication in male Wistar rats. Pol. J. Vet. Sci., 23: 7788. 
Said S.I. (1991). Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide: biologic role in 
health and disease. Trends Endocrinol Metab., 2: 107–112.
Schneider C.A., Rasband W.S., Eliceiri K.W. (2012). NIH Image  
to ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis. Nat. Methods, 9: 671–  
675. 
So K-W., Ng P-C. (2005). Treatment and prevention of neonatal osteo-
penia. Curr. Pediatr., 15: 106–113.
Suvarna S.K., Layton C., Bancroft J.D. (2013). Bancroft’s theory and 
practice of histological techniques, 7th ed. Churchill Livingstone, 
New York, NY , USA.
Świetlicka I., Muszyński S., Tomaszewska E., Dobrowolski P., 
Kwaśniewska A., Świetlicki M., Skic A., Gołacki K. (2016). Pre-
natally administered HMB modifies the enamel surface roughness 
in spiny mice offspring: An atomic force microscopy study. Arch. 
Oral Biol., 70: 2431. 
Tatara M.R., Śliwa E., Krupski W. (2007). Prenatal programming of 
skeletal development in the offspring: effects of maternal treat -
ment with β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) on femur proper -
ties in pigs at slaughter age. Bone, 40: 1615–1622.
Tomaszewska E., Dobrowolski P., Puzio I., Prost Ł., Kurlak P., Saw -
czuk P., Badzian B., Hułas-Stasiak M., Kostro K. (2014). Acryl -
amide-induced prenatal programming intestine structure in guinea 
pig. J. Physiol. Pharmacol., 65: 107–115.
Tomaszewska E., Dobrowolski P., Świetlicka I., Muszyński S., Kostro 
K., Jakubczak A., Taszkun I., Żmuda A., Rycerz, K., Blicharski 
T., Jaworska-Adamu J. (2018). Effects of maternal treatment with 
β-hydroxy-β-metylbutyrate and 2-oxoglutaric acid on femur de -
velopment in offspring of minks of the standard dark brown type. 
J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr., 102: e299–e308.
Tomaszewska E., Muszyński S., Dobrowolski P., Wiącek D., Tom-  
czyk-Warunek A., Świetlicka I., Pierzynowski G.P. (2019). Ma -
ternal HMB treatment affects bone and hyaline cartilage develop-
ment in their weaned piglets via the leptin/osteoprotegerin system. 
J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr., 103: 626–643.
Tomaszewska E., Dobrowolski P., Puzio I., Donaldson J., Muszyński 
S. (2020). Acrylamide-induced prenatal programming of bone 
structure in mammal model. Ann. Anim. Sci., 20: 1257–1287.
Tomaszewska E., Burmańczuk N., Dobrowolski P., Świątkiewicz M., 
Donaldson J., Burmańczuk A., Mielnik-Błaszczak M., Kuc D., 
Milewski S., Muszyński S. (2021). The protective role of alpha-
ketoglutaric acid on the growth and bone development of experi -
mentally induced perinatal growth-retarded piglets. Animals, 11: 
137. 
Tomczyk-Warunek A., Blicharski T., Jarecki J., Dobrowolski P., 
Muszyński S., Tomaszewska E., Rovati L.C. (2021). The effect 
of maternal HMB supplementation on bone mechanical and geo -
metrical properties, as well as histomorphometry and immuno -
localization of VEGF, TIMP2, MMP13, BMP2 in the bone and 
cartilage tissue of the humerus of their newborn piglets. PloS One, 
16: 2 e024–0642.
Vu J.P., Larauche M., Flores M., Luong L., Norris J., Oh S., Liang L.J., 
Waschek J., Pisegna J.R., Germano P.M. (2015). Regulation of 
appetite, body composition, and metabolic hormones by vasoac -
tive intestinal polypeptide (VIP). J. Mol. Neurosci., 56: 377–387.
Winzell M.S., Ahrén B. (2007). Role of VIP and PACAP in islet func-
tion. Peptides, 28: 1805–1813.
Xiong X., Tan B., Song M., Ji P., Kim K., Yin Y ., Liu Y . (2019). Nu-
tritional intervention for the intestinal development and health of 
weaned pigs. Front. Vet. Sci., 6: 46. 
Yavas C., Yavas G., Acar H., Toy H., Yuce D., Akyurek S., Ata O. 
(2013). Amelioration of radiation-induced acute inflammation 
and mucosal atrophy by beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate, 
L-glutamıne, and L-argınıne: results of an experimental study. 
Support Care Cancer, 21: 883–888. 
Zheng C., Song B., Duan Y ., Zhong Y ., Yan Z., Zhang S., Li F. (2020). 
Dietary β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate improves intestinal function 
in weaned piglets after lipopolysaccharide challenge. Nutrition, 
78: 110839.
Received: 16 VIII 2021
Accepted: 17 IX 2021
Maternal b-hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate (HMB) supplementation
during pregnancy affects early folliculogenesis in the ovary of
newborn piglets
Monika Hu łas-Stasiak a, *, Joanna Jakubowicz-Gil a, Piotr Dobrowolski a,
Ewa Tomaszewska b, Siemowit Muszy /C19nski c
a Department of Comparative Anatomy and Anthropology, Maria Curie-Sklodowska University, Akademicka St. 19, 20-033, Lublin, Poland
b Department of Animal Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Akademicka St. 12, 20-950, Lublin, Poland
c Department of Physics, Faculty of Production Engineering, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Akademicka St. 13, 20-950, Lublin, Poland
article info
Article history:
Received 8 September 2018
Received in revised form
15 January 2019
Accepted 1 February 2019
Available online 2 February 2019
Keywords:
Gestation
HMB
Folliculogenesis
Ovary
Offspring
Neonatal piglets
abstract
Beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate (HMB) is a leucine metabolite with protein anabolic effects. This
study was designed to determine whether prenatal HMB treatment has an effect on oogenesis and
folliculogenesis in the ovary of newborn piglets. HMB decreased the number of egg nests and primordial
follicles and increased the pool of developing follicles compared to the control group. Although the
percentage of TUNEL-positive oocytes within the egg nests was higher in HMB-treated group no increase
in the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio and active caspase-3 expression was observed. Moreover, the granulosa cell pro-
liferation index and StAR protein expression were higher in HMB-treated group. In contrast to the control
group, the expression of E-cadherins was reduced after the HMB treatment. In addition, a signi ﬁcant
increase in the serum level of gonadotropins and steroid hormones was detected in HMB-treated piglets.
In conclusion, prenatal HMB treatment dysregulates hormonal homeostasis which impairs early folli-
culogenesis in piglets.
© 2019 Published by Elsevier Inc.
1. Introduction
Nutrition is a major intrauterine environmental factor deter-
mining the proper development and function of foetal tissues, or-
gans, and systems. Alterations in foetal nutrition and endocrine
status may result in developmental disorders, which may induce
long-term effects on the health status in adult life [ 1,2]. The nega-
tive effects of nutritional manipulation during pregnancy on the
development of the porcine and bovine foetal ovary and its sub-
sequent function are well-documented [ 1e4].
The foetal ovary is particularly sensitive to factors acting early in
the prenatal period and playing a crucial role in determination of
the reproductive status by establishment of the size of the pri-
mordial follicle pool in adult females. The availability of this pool
largely depends on a process of germline cyst breakdown during
the prenatal and neonatal period. It seems that, E-cadherins as
adhesion molecules (transmembrane glycoproteins) are important
for follicular morphogenesis and they are involved in establishing
the germ cell stock and primordial follicle formation in mouse [5,6],
hamster [7] and pig [ 8] ovaries.
Besides oocyte attrition, follicular atresia is another important
event that takes place during prenatal folliculogenesis in pigs.
Apoptosis is one of the multiple mechanisms of cell death proposed
to be involved in oocyte loss and follicular atresia [9e12]. Apoptosis
can be additionally enhanced by environmental toxicants and
maternal nutrition or stress [3,4,13]. During apoptosis, a central role
is played by active caspase-3. This enzyme is responsible for the
proteolytic cleavage of cellular and nuclear substrates that lead to
morphological changes typical of apoptosis [ 14]. Apoptosis is a
complex mechanism regulated by many proteins. The level of the
pro-apoptotic factor Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) and the anti-
apoptotic factor B cell lymphoma/leukaemia-2 (Bcl-2) serves as a
good marker for apoptosis [ 15]. During ovarian development, the
balance between cell death and proliferation determines the
pattern of follicular atresia.
В-hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate (HMB) is a natural biologically
active compound available in many food stuffs such as: asparagus,* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: monhul@o2.pl (M. Hu łas-Stasiak).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Theriogenology
journal homepage: www.theriojournal.com
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.theriogenology.2019.02.003
0093-691X/© 2019 Published by Elsevier Inc.
Theriogenology 128 (2019) 91 e10 0

=== PAGE 7 ===
avocado, cauliﬂower, and grapefruit [ 16]. As a supplement, HMB is
commercially available mainly as a salt, calcium-HMB mono-
hydrate. HMB is a metabolite of the essential branched-chain
amino acid leucine. In normal conditions, approximately 5% of
leucine metabolism leads to endogenous synthesis of HMB [ 17,18].
The physiological plasma concentration of HMB in pigs ranges from
1t o4 mM, which increases 5 e10-fold after leucine administration
[19]. HMB is widely used as an ergogenic supplement mainly in
bodybuilders and athletes who want to improve performance and
enlarge muscle mass [20e22]. As the number of reports on positive
effects of prenatal and postnatal HMB supplementation is still
growing, the research tries to identify its potential medical appli-
cations. An interesting perspective on HMB supplementation is
provided by chicken studies. HMB solution injection into the broiler
eggs increased interstinal villi length and surface areas as well as
enhanced capacity to digest disaccharidases and stimulated inter-
stinal ﬂora development which made chickens more resistant to
infections [ 23,24]. In their review, Cieslak and Nieradko-Iwanicka
[25] discussed the potential application of HMB in woman and
their infants during pregnancy and perinatal period. The HMB us-
age during pregnancy or shortly after birth is connected with
increased muscle anabolism in the animal offspring [ 26e30]. Many
factors with mTOR signaling pathway [ 27,28,31], increased activity
of GH/IGF-1 axis [ 32,33] or elevated blood concentration of some
amino acids [ 27e29,32] may be responsible for this effect. Ac-
cording to quoted authors such activity might be potentially helpful
for infants born with intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR).
Moreover, improvement of the immune system in calves [ 34], bone
and cartilage properties in piglets [ 32,35,36] as well as colostrum
and milk quality in sows [ 37] are other potential bene ﬁts well-
documented in literature. Although numerous possible positive
effects have been postulated, there is still insuf ﬁcient data on the
safety of HMB supplementation and its in ﬂuence on the develop-
ment of various internal organs during prenatal period.
To our knowledge, there is no information regarding the effects
of HMB on the reproductive system, especially the ovary. Thus,
there is a need to test the hypothesis that maternal HMB treatment
during gestation could have a positive impact on the ovarian
morphogenesis of newborn piglets. Therefore, the aim of the pre-
sent study was to determine the effect of prenatally administered
HMB on oogenesis, folliculogenesis and the ovary structure in the
newborn piglets. Thus, 1) the ovarian histomorphometry and ac-
tivity (proliferation and apoptosis), 2) the effect of HMB on ste-
roidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) and E-cadherin
expression as well as 3) serum gonadotropin and steroid hormones
concentration were examined.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Animals and experimental design
The experiment was approved by the Local Ethics Committee on
Animal Experimentation of University of Life Sciences in Lublin in
Poland (No. 2014/29). The study was performed on 12 newborn,
“before ﬁrst colostrum uptake ” female piglets obtained from 12
sows (Pulawska breed) as a result of physiological farrowing and
bred to the same boar. Primiparous sows were used in the control
and experimental groups to avoid the effect of the number of
pregnancies on the birth weight in the offspring. The sows in both
groups were of similar age (10 months) and body weight
(100e120 kg) and mated during the third oestrus. The pregnant
sows were divided into two equal groups: control (n ¼ 6) and
experimental (HMB-treated, n ¼ 6). They were individually
conﬁned under standard conditions (controlled temperature, hu-
midity, and 12:12 h light/dark cycle) with free access to fresh water
and fed twice a day (2.3 kg/day/sow, at 08.00 a.m. and 04.00 p.m.)
with well balance commercial diet for pregnant and lactating sows
commonly used (38). The experimental group received calcium salt
of b-hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate (CaHMB; Lonza, Switzerland) at the
dose of 0.2 mg/kg bw/day during the period between gestation
days 70 and 90. The dose of HMB was based on data published by
Swietlicka collaborators [ 39]. HMB used in a dose of 0.2 g/kg bw/
day had a signi ﬁcant effect on enamel surface development of the
spiny mouse offspring. The days chosen for the HMB exposure are
critical for ovarian development in pigs, which includes the process
of primordial follicle formation and the beginning of its transition
into primary stage [ 40]. Powdered HMB was added to the ﬁrst
portion of food and administered to sows during the morning meal.
The control group received feed with placebo (CaCO 3 at the daily
dose of 0.2 mg/kg/b.w.). Randomly selected, newborn female pig-
lets from the control (n ¼ 6) and HMB-treated group (n ¼ 6) were
weighed and euthanized by intravenous injection of a lethal dose of
pentobarbitalum natricum (Morbital, Biowet, Pu ławy, Poland)
immediately after parturition. The ovaries were then isolated and
weighed.
2.2. Tissue preparation
The right ovaries from the newborn piglets (12 ovaries in total)
were ﬁxed in phosphate-buffered 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 h at
room temperature, dehydrated, and embedded in Paraplast
(Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Mo, USA). The ovaries were serially
sectioned at 5 mm thickness on a rotary microtome. Consecutive
sections were placed on polysine-coated glass slides (SuperFrost
Plus, Germany), numbered, and processed for routine
haematoxylin-eosin (H &E) staining and immunohistochemistry.
Some sections were stained with Masson-Goldner trichrome [ 41],
which speci ﬁcally stains collagen ﬁbers (green colour) and distin-
guishes them from surrounding cells of connective tissue in the
ovarian stroma.
2.3. Follicle counts
The egg nests and individual follicles were counted manually.
Three randomly selected slides (seven ovarian sections per slide)
from each ovary (n ¼ 6 per group) were evaluated quantitatively.
Every third section was analysed and only follicles with visible
oocytes were counted to avoid double counting. The egg nests were
classiﬁed into two subcategories based on their appearance: a
healthy egg nest, i.e. a group of tightly packed oocytes surrounded
by a layer of squamous follicular cells, and egg nest breakdown with
the loss of connections between degenerated oocytes and pre-
granulosa cells migrating into the nests. [ 42]. Follicular counts
were made using a 40x objective on an Eclipse E /C0 800 light mi-
croscope. Follicles were identi ﬁed according to the Pedersen and
Peters classi ﬁcation system [ 43], which distinguishes, brie ﬂy, pri-
mordial follicles with an oocyte surrounded by ﬂattened granulosa
cells, primary follicles with a single layer of cuboidal granulosa
cells, and transitional follicles with 1 e2 layers of columnar gran-
ulosa cells.
2.4. Histomorphometric analyses
Every third section (7 sections per slide) from three slides
selected from 6 control and HMB-treated piglets (n ¼ 54 sections
per group) was subjected to image evaluation. The sections were
photographed and analysed using an LSM5 Pascal microscope (Carl
Zeiss, Jena, Germany) connected to a digital camera (AxioCam HRc,
Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) and a computer. Cross sectional area of
the ovary and thickness of cortex were measured using ImageJ
M. Hu łas-Stasiak et al. / Theriogenology 128 (2019) 91 e10092
software (ImageJ 1.54 h; Wayne Rasband, National Institute of
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). The ovary boundaries were manually
outlined on each image using a high precision graphical tablet
(Intuos Pro M, Wacom Co. Ltd., Kazo, Japan) connected to the
computer. The software calculated the number of pixels enclosed
within the viewed area and the process was repeated for each
section. The cortex thickness was measured from below the tunica
albuginea to the beginning of the medulla layer. 10 measurements
per section of equal distance were performed in the ovarian cortex
using a linear tool. When morphometric analysis was done, the
cortex -to-medulla ratio was estimated. To assess the spatial dis-
tribution of connective tissue in the ovary medulla, the software's
colour threshold function was applied to the bright ﬁeld micro-
scope images of ovarian sections stained by Goldner's method. The
green colour thresholds for collagen and red to black for cells were
used to distinguish cellular and ﬁbrous connective tissue elements
from the manually selected area of the ovarian medulla. Such
isolation facilitated assessment of the spatial distribution of cells
and collagen ﬁbers. Subsequently, the software pixel counting
function was used, and the areas of cells and collagen ﬁbers were
calculated as a percent of ovarian stroma sectional surface. The cell
components/collagen ﬁber ratio was estimated.
2.5. Immunohistochemistry
Brieﬂy, paraplast sections were deparaf ﬁnised, rehydrated, and
microwaved 3 /C2 5min in 10 mM citrate buffer, pH 6.0, to retrieve
antigenicity. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 3%
H2O2 in methanol (1:1) and nonspeci ﬁc binding was prevented
using UltraCruz ® Blocking Reagent (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Santa Cruz, CA). The mouse anti-proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA) monoclonal antibody (1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Santa Cruz, CA) as well as rabbit polyclonal anti-E-cadherin and
anti-Ki67 (1:100, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) antibodies were applied
to the tissue sections and incubated overnight at 4 /C14 C. The antigens
were visualized using secondary biotinylated goat anti-mouse or
rabbit IgG (1:200, 1 h at room temperature, Abcam, Cambridge, UK),
an ImmunoCruz® ABC kit (30 min at room temperature; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), and 3,3 0-diaminobenzidine (DAB
substrate kit, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) as a chromogen staining the
substrate. After each step of the above procedure, the sections were
rinsed with Tris-buffered saline (TBS) pH 7.6. The sections were
counterstained with Mayer's haematoxylin (Sigma-Aldrich). Next,
the slides were dehydrated and mounted in DPX. The negative
controls were similarly handled in the absence of the primary
antibody. Finally, the selected slides were examined using an LSM5
Pascal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) connected to a digital
camera (AxioCam HRc, Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) and a computer.
The percentage of PCNA and Ki67-positive oocytes within the egg
nests (healthy and breakdown nests) were calculated by dividing
the number of positively stained oocytes by the total number of
oocytes within the egg nests per section and the result was
multiplied by 100. In turn, the percentage of follicles with PCNA
positive oocyte was presented as the number of PCNA positive
oocytes enclosed in follicles in relation to the total number of pri-
mordial, primary, and transitional follicles per section. Similarly,
the percentage of developing follicles with PCNA and Ki67-positive
granulosa cells was expressed as the number at least one PCNA/
Ki67 positively stained granulosa cell in relation to the total num-
ber of each follicular stages per section. Moreover, the proliferation
index of the granulosa layer was measured by evaluating the
number of PCNA and Ki67-positive granulosa cells per the total
number of these cells within primary and transitional follicles per
section. At least six randomly selected ovarian sections were eval-
uated for each animal and PCNA/Ki67-positive granulosa cells/
follicles were investigated across the entire section.
2.6. TUNEL staining (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-
mediated dUTP nick end-labelling) reaction
Paraplast sections were dewaxed in xylene, rehydrated in
ethanol, and rinsed in water. Next, the tissue sections were
microwaved for 3 min in 10 mM citrate buffer, pH 6.0, washed in
PBS, and treated to identify TUNEL-positive cells according to the
manufacturer's protocol for the ApopTag ® Peroxidase In Situ
Apoptosis Detection Kit (Chemicon International, Melbourne,
Australia). All the sections were counterstained with Mayer's hae-
matoxylin. A negative control was performed without the active
TdT enzyme. The slides were examined and photographed using an
LSM5 Pascal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) connected to a
digital camera (AxioCam HRc, Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) and a
computer. The percentage number of apoptotic germ cells within
the egg nests was calculated by dividing the number of TUNEL-
positive oocytes by the total number of oocytes within the egg
nests and the result was multiplied by 100. At least six randomly
selected ovarian sections were evaluated for each animal (6 sec-
tions per 1 animal, n ¼ 6 in each group, in total 72 sections were
analysed).
2.7. Western-blot analysis
The left ovaries obtained from 6 experimental and 6 control
piglets were (separately) homogenized in lysis buffer (125 mM
TRIS-HCl pH 6.8; 4% SDS; 10% glycerol; 100 mM DTT), boiled in a
water bath for 10 min, and centrifuged at 1 0000/C2 g for 10 min, and
the supernatant was collected. The protein concentration was
determined with the Bradford method [ 44], and samples of su-
pernatants containing 80 mg of proteins were separated by 10%
SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and subsequently trans-
ferred onto an Immobilon P membrane (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
Mo, USA). Following the transfer, the membranes were blocked
with 3% low fat milk in PBS for 1 h and incubated overnight with
polyclonal rabbit anti-caspase-3 (1:1000, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
Mo, USA), anti-Bcl2 (1:1000, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz,
CA), anti-Bax (1:300, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), anti-StAR (1:1000,
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), anti-E-cadherin
(1:1000), anti-Ki67 (1:500), and monoclonal mouse anti-PCNA
(1:1000) antibodies. The membranes were washed three times
for 10 min with PBS containing 0.05% TRITON X-100 (Sigma-
Aldrich, St. Louis, Mo, USA) and incubated for 2 h with a 1:30 000
dilution of alkaline phosphatase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit or
mouse IgG (Abcam, Cambridge, UK). The membranes were visual-
ized by adding BCIP (5-bromo-4-chloro-3indolyl phosphate, Sigma-
Aldrich) and NBT (nitrotetrazolium blue chloride, Sigma-Aldrich, St.
Louis, Mo, USA), which gave a blue reaction colour. An anti- b-actin
antibody (1:2000, Sigma-Aldrich) was used as the loading control.
The blots were densitometrically quanti ﬁed and normalized to
their corresponding b-actin bands using the public domain ImageJ
program with “Gel Analysis ” function. Semi-quantitative analysis
was performed for three separately repeated experiments from
each control and HMB-treated group.
2.8. Biochemical analyses of serum in newborn piglets
Blood was collected using standard venous puncture. Blood
samples from newborn unsuckled piglets were centrifuged after
clotting at room temperature and serum samples were frozen
at /C0 80 /C14 C for further analysis. All samples were determined in
triplicate. Quantitative analyses of gonadotropins (FSH, LH) and
steroid hormones (17 b-estradiol, testosterone, progesterone) in
M. Hu łas-Stasiak et al. / Theriogenology 128 (2019) 91 e100 93

=== PAGE 8 ===
serum were performed with the ELISA method. The level of hor-
mones was determined using the following commercial porcine
immunoenzymatic assays according to the manufacturer's in-
structions: FSH kit (sensitivity: 0.745 IU/L, Sunred Biotechnology
Company, Shanghai, China), LH kit (sensitivity: 0.038 ng/ml, China),
17b-estradiol and testosterone (MyBioSource, San Diego, USA,
sensitivity: 0.06 ng/ml and 0.05 ng/ml, respectively), and proges-
terone (Bioassay Technology Laboratory, Shanghai, China, sensi-
tivity: 0.27 ng/ml). The results of the hormonal analyses were
obtained with the use of Benchmark Plus microplate spectropho-
tometer supplied with Microplate Manager Software Version 5.2.1
(Bio-Red Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA, USA).
2.9. Image analysis
To estimate the intensity of immunostaining for E-cadherin,
digital images from 6 sections of ovaries from each control and
DEX-treated female were analysed. In total, 72 sections were sub-
jected to image analysis (6 sections per 1 animal, n ¼ 6 in each
group). The slides were processed immunohistochemically in the
same laboratory conditions in order to obtain comparable staining
intensities. The digital colour images were registered using an LSM
5 Pa confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) equipped with
an AxioCam HRc camera (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) and connected
to a computer. Images of egg nests and primordial, primary, and
transitional ovarian follicles were captured by a 40x objective. All
images were saved as 24 bit RGB colour images in TIFF (Tagged
Image File Format) for quantiﬁcation. A colour threshold function of
ImageJ (Wayne Rasband, National Institute of Mental Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA) was used to separate DAB stained pixels
from the background. To deﬁne the colour threshold range for DAB,
the hue, saturation, and brightness for the randomly chosen sample
of images were established. Then, the selected threshold was
applied to extract the positively stained colour pixels (DAB) from
the background (haematoxylin stained pixels) in the analysed im-
ages. 10 separate measurements (per sections) for each type of egg
nest and ovarian follicles were analysed. The intensity of the IHC
reaction was evaluated in the 8-bit greyscale. In the digital image
analysis, the pixel intensity values range from 0 to 255, wherein
0 represents the black and 255 the white shade of grey. In order to
facilitate illustration of the obtained results (graph in the text), the
pixel brightness values were measured on inverted images in the 8-
bit greyscale (from 0-white to 255-black).
2.10. Statistical analysis
All results are expressed as means ± SD. Normal distribution of
data was examined using the Shapiro-Wilk test and equality of
variance was tested with the Brown-Forsythe tests. As data was
non-normally distributed, differences between the control and
HMB-treated groups were assessed using Mann-Whitney U test. A
P-value less than 0.05 was considered statistically signi ﬁcant. All
statistical analyses were carried out using STATISTICA 12.0 software
(StatSoft, Inc. 2017).
3. Results
3.1. General observations
The HMB administration did not in ﬂuence the gestation length
or the mean number of stillborn and live born piglets in litters
delivered by the HMB-treated sows. However, maternal HMB
treatment signi ﬁcantly increased body mass (40%) and ovary
weight (50%) in newborn piglets, compared with control animals
(Table 1).
3.2. Evaluation of ovarian histology
Routine staining with HE and Masson-Goldner trichrome showed
signiﬁcant differences in the ovarian morphology between the con-
trol and HMB-treated piglets. Representative images of piglets'
ovarian morphology are shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 . The 1-day-old
piglets’ ovaries from both the HMB-treated and the control groups
had distinct cortical and medullary regions. The histomorphometric
analysis showed that the ovarian cross sectional area was signi ﬁ-
cantly increased in the HMB-treated group (p < 0.001) as compared
to the control while such parameters as the cortex thickness
(p < 0.001), ovarian cortex percentage area (p < 0.001), and cortex/
medulla ratio (p < 0.01) were signi ﬁcantly decreased in the HMB
group in comparison with the control piglets (Table 1). Furthermore,
the detailed analysis of medulla compartments indicated the higher
(p < 0.01) ratio of cell components to the collagenﬁbers in the HMB-
treated group than in the control one ( Table 1). Both in the control
and the HMB-treated ovaries, a majority of oocytes were enclosed in
egg nests in the outer cortex under the surface epithelium (Fig. 2E and
F). The ovaries of both examined groups contained primordial, pri-
mary, and transitional follicles located in the cortex near the med-
ullary border (Fig. 2A, B, 2C, 2D). The results of the egg nest and follicle
counting are given in Table 2 . The mean number of healthy and
breakdown egg nests was signi ﬁcantly lower (p < 0.001, p < 0.01
respectively) in the HMB piglets than in the control. In addition, the
HMB treatment decreased (p < 0.001) the mean total number of
primordial follicles, compared with the control. Interestingly, the
total number of developing follicles (primary and transitional) was
higher (p < 0.01, p < 0.001, respectively) in the HMB-treated piglets,
compared with the control animals.
3.3. TUNEL assay
A positive TUNEL signal was visible in the oocytes within the egg
Table 1
Effect of HMB on body weight and ovarian parameters in newborn piglets.
Parameter Control HMB
Body weight, g 880 ± 85 1230 ± 122**
Ovary weight, mg 23.4 ± 4.2 35.2 ± 6.7**
Ovarian cross sectional area, mm 2 7.9 ± 1.2 9.2 ± 0.6***
Cortex layer thickness, mm 754 ± 142 417 ± 96.4***
Cortex percentage (%) area of the ovary 59.5 ± 8.5 46.7 ± 8.6***
Cortex/medulla ratio 1.6 ± 0.3 0.9 ± 0.5**
Medullar cells/collagen ﬁber ratio 3.2 ± 0.7 5.8 ± 1.4**
Data is presented as mean ± SD.; P-values less than 0.05 from the Mann-Whitney
test are indicated **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Fig. 1. Histological structure of the ovaries (trichrome Masson-Goldner staining)
obtained from control (A) and HMB-treated (B) 1-day-old piglets. The cortex (C) and
the medulla (M) are well visible. The cortex layer (white arrows) is reduced in the
HMB-treated group (B), compared with the control (A). The collagen ﬁbers (stained in
green) are wide-spread in the medulla of the control group (black arrow, A) while
abundant cellular components of connective tissue are observed in the HMB-treated
ovaries (black arrow, B). Scale bars represent 500 mm.
M. Hu łas-Stasiak et al. / Theriogenology 128 (2019) 91 e10094
nests, predominantly in the cyst breakdown in both the control and
HMB-treated females ( Fig. 3 A and B). There was no detectable
TUNEL signal in the oocytes and granulosa cells of primordial,
primary, and transitional follicles. The HMB treatment resulted in a
signiﬁcantly higher (p < 0.001) percentage of apoptotic oocytes
within the breakdown egg nests compared to the control group
(Table 3). There were no signi ﬁcant differences in healthy nests in
this regard.
3.4. Immunohistochemistry
3.4.1. Immunolocalization of E-cadherin
In both investigated groups, E-cadherin staining was observed
at the oocyte-oocyte contact sites within the egg nests. In the pri-
mordial and primary follicles, E-cadherin staining was visible be-
tween the oocyte and granulosa cell compartments (probably in
the oocyte plasma membrane and cytoplasm, Fig. 3C and D). With
the formation of transitional follicles, less intensive labelling was
detected in both the control and the HMB-treated group ( Fig. 3 D,
inset, Fig. 4 .). The immunoreactivity for E-cadherin in healthy
breakdown nests as well as in primordial follicles was signi ﬁcantly
lower (p < 0.001, p < 0.01 and p < 0.001, respectively) in the HMB-
treated group than in the control ( Fig. 4 ). In both groups, there
was a tendency to reduce the intensity of staining with the follic-
ular development ( Fig. 4 ).
3.4.2. PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) staining
The immunohistochemistry analysis revealed exclusively nu-
clear PCNA localization in the oocytes within the egg nests and in
the oocytes enclosed in primordial and developing follicles in both
the control and HMB group ( Fig. 5 A and B). As revealed by the
quantitative analysis, the percentage of PCNA-positive oocytes
within the healthy and breakdown egg nests was greater
(p < 0.001) in the HMB-treated group than in the control ( Table 3).
In addition, administration of HMB increased (p < 0.01) the per-
centage of primary follicles with PCNA-positive oocytes but
decreased (p < 0.001) the percentage of the primordial follicles as
compared with the control group ( Table 4). PCNA staining was also
detected in the granulosa cells of primary and transitional follicles
and the percentage of primary and transitional follicles with at least
one PCNA-positive granulosa cell was signi ﬁcantly higher (p < 0.01,
p < 0.001 respectively) in the prenatally HMB-exposed ovaries than
in the control ones ( Table 4). Moreover, the PCNA proliferative in-
dex of granulosa cells within transitional follicles was signi ﬁcantly
higher (p < 0.001) in the HMB-treated group, compared with the
control (Table 5). There were no statistically signi ﬁcant differences
in primary follicles in this regard.
3.4.3. Ki67 (proliferation marker) staining
In contrast to PCNA staining, Ki67 was not expressed in the
oocytes of primordial, primary, and transitional follicles in both the
control and HMB-treated ovaries. Ki67 staining was detected in the
oocytes within the egg nests and in the granulosa cells of primary
and transitional follicles in both examined groups ( Fig. 5 C and D).
Fig. 2. Histological structure of the ovaries obtained from control (A, B) and HMB-
treated (C, D) 1-day-old piglets. A higher number of primordial follicles is noted in the
control (A, B) than in the HMB-treated group (C, D). The transitional follicles are
located in the cortex near the medullary border both in the control (B, arrows, inset)
and the HMB-exposed ovaries (D, arrows, inset). The healthy (E) and breakdown (F)
egg nests present in both examined groups. A-D trichrome Masson-Goldner staining;
E, F HE staining. Scale bars represent 100 mm.
Table 2
Number of total egg nests and follicle types in the newborn piglet ovary.
Ovarian structure Control HMB
Total number of egg nests 82.0 ± 29.6 63.3 ± 20*
Healthy egg nests 103 ± 28 49.6 ± 18***
Egg nest breakdown 60.8 ± 10 77.1 ± 10**
Total number of primordial follicles 364.4 ± 17.3 223.3 ± 10.7***
Total number of primary follicles 67.5 ± 6.4 116.8 ± 9.4**
Total number of transitional follicles 21.4 ± 2.4 37.7 ± 5.6***
Data is presented as mean ± SD.; P-values less than 0.05 from the Mann-Whitney
test are indicated *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Fig. 3. Localization of apoptotic cells and E-cadherin in the ovaries from control
(A, C) and HMB-treated (B, D) 1-day-old piglets. Apoptotic, brown stained cells were
identiﬁed using TUNEL assay. Apoptotic oocytes are visible within egg nests of the
control (A, arrows) and the HMB-treated group (B, arrows). A negative control was
performed without active TdTenzyme (B, inset). Strong E-cadherin labelling is
observed between oocytes gathered in healthy egg nests in the control (C, arrows) and
after HMB treatment. The less intensive staining is seen in transitional follicles in
granulosa layer (D, inset) and during oocyte nests breakdown (D, arrows) in both
examined groups. Scale bars represent 50 mm.
M. Hu łas-Stasiak et al. / Theriogenology 128 (2019) 91 e100 95

=== PAGE 9 ===
After the HMB treatment, the percentage of Ki67-positive oocytes
within the healthy egg nests was lower (p < 0.001) than in the
control. However, there were no signi ﬁcant differences in the per-
centage of Ki67-positive oocytes within the breakdown nests be-
tween the two examined groups ( Table 3 ). Furthermore, the
percentage of primary and transitional follicles with at least one
Ki67-positive granulosa cell was signi ﬁcantly higher (p < 0.05) in
the HMB group than in the control ( Table 4). Additionally, the Ki67
proliferation index in the granulosa cells of transitional follicles was
also signi ﬁcantly higher (p < 0.01) after the HMB treatment
(Table 5). There were no statistically signi ﬁcant differences in pri-
mary follicles. Interestingly, the quantitative analysis showed dif-
ferences in the proportion of PCNA and Ki67-positive oocytes
clustered in the nests between the examined groups as well as
within these groups ( Table 3). In the HMB-treated group, the per-
centage of Ki67-positive oocytes within the total egg nests
(healthy þ breakdown) was lower than the percentage of PCNA-
positive oocytes, whereas the percentages of Ki67-and PCNA-
positive oocytes in the control group were comparable. Further-
more, the percentage of PCNA-positive oocytes was higher than
that of Ki67 in the breakdown nests of both examined groups
(Table 3).
3.5. Western blot
The immunoblot analysis revealed lower (p < 0.001) expression
of caspase-3 in the HMB-treated group relative to the control pig-
lets ( Fig. 6 A and B). Moreover, the expression of Bcl-2 and Bax
proteins was higher in the HMB-treated piglets (p < 0.01, p < 0.05
respectively, Fig. 6 A and B). However, the ratio of Bax/Bcl2 was
higher in the control than in the HMB group (1.14 ± 0.01;
0.95 ± 0.03 respectively; p < 0.01). Additionally, the densitometric
analysis indicated a signiﬁcant increase in the PCNA (p < 0.001) and
StAR (p < 0.001) protein level following the HMB administration
(Fig. 6A and B). However, the expression of Ki67 and E-cadherin was
lower (p < 0.05, p < 0.01, respectively) in the prenatally HMB-
treated group compared with the control group ( Fig. 6A and B).
3.6. Hormone concentration in the serum of newborn (1-day-old)
piglets
Higher concentrations of FSH and LH (p < 0.001, p < 0.01,
respectively) were detected in the HMB-treated piglets than in the
control group. Furthermore, the concentration of steroid hormones,
i.e. 17b-estradiol, testosterone, and progesterone, was also signi ﬁ-
cantly higher (p < 0.01, p< 0.001, p < 0.05 respectively) in the HMB-
exposed piglets, compared with the control ( Table 6).
4. Discussion
Studies in animals and humans have shown that maternal di-
etary intake during pregnancy impairs ovarian function in offspring
[1e4]. To our knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst report on the effect
of maternal diet supplemented with HMB on ovarian structure and
folliculogenesis in newborn piglets. The ﬁndings from this study
clearly showed that the prenatal HMB treatment caused both
quantitative and structural alterations in 1-day-old piglet ovaries.
These changes were manifested by the reduction of egg nests and
primordial follicle reserve which is essential for preservation of
fertility in adult females. The observed decrease in the pool of
primordial follicles at birth was offset by an increase in the number
of developing (primary and transitional) follicles. This suggests that
prenatal exposure to HMB accelerates follicular recruitment.
Further, the ﬁndings of this study demonstrated that HMB may
alert hormonal homeostasis in female offspring. An elevated serum
level of FSH, LH and a signi ﬁcantly higher concentration of steroid
Table 3
Effect of prenatal HMB supplementation on the percentage of apoptotic and PCNA- and Ki67-positive oocytes within egg nests in the ovaries of newborn p iglets.
Egg nests control HMB
PCNA Ki67 TUNEL PCNA Ki67 TUNEL
Total egg nests 40.1 ± 7.2 38.9 ± 8.4 15.3 ± 9.3 63.5 ± 7.6*** 24.2 ± 8.3*** 30.3 ± 6.7***
Healthy egg nests 25.6 ± 4.3 47.2 ± 4.5 14.5 ± 3.1 53.1 ± 7.5*** 32.2 ± 7.3*** 16.5 ± 2.3
Breakdown egg nests 48.3 ± 10.2 23.4 ± 4.5 20.4 ± 3.5 78.1 ± 4.4*** 20.8 ± 4.01 42.5 ± 7.0***
Data is presented as mean ± SD.; P-values less than 0.05 from the Mann-Whitney test are indicated ***p < 0.001.
Fig. 4. Charts representing the intensity of E-cadherin immunostaining in control
and HMB-treated ovaries from newborn piglets. Data is presented as mean ± SD. P-
values less than 0.05 from Student's t-test are indicated **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Fig. 5. Immunolocalization of PCNA and Ki67 in control (A, C) and HMB-treated (B,
D) ovaries from newborn piglets. PCNA is mainly localised in oocytes within egg nests
as well as in oocytes and granulosa cells of developing follicles both in the control (A,
inset) and the HMB-treated group (B, inset). Negative controls were performed in the
absence of the primary antibodies (A, C, inset). Ki67 staining is also detected in oocyte
egg nests (arrows) and granulosa cells of developing follicles from the control (C, inset)
and HMB-treated group (D, inset). Scale bars represent 50 mm.
M. Hu łas-Stasiak et al. / Theriogenology 128 (2019) 91 e10096
hormones (17 b-estradiol, testosterone, and progesterone) was
noted in HMB-treated group. Tatara et al. [ 32,35,45] reported that
prenatal and neonatal exposure of piglets and lamb to HMB
respectively, increased the growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like
growth factor -1 (IGF-1) serum level. Similar effects were docu-
mented in rats [ 33]. As reported by these authors, HMB can act
through the GH/IGH-1 axis.
It is not clear whether an increase in serum hormone levels in
newborn piglets is the result of direct HMB action on the foetus or
mediated by uterine environment or a combination of both. How-
ever, it is well known that both a deﬁciency and an excess of steroid
hormones during foetal life can impair ovarian development
[46,47]. The reduction of the primordial follicle pool and increased
ovarian follicular recruitment were also observed in foetal sheep
after the exposure to excess testosterone [ 48]. Androgens can act
directly through androgen receptors and indirectly after conversion
to oestrogens via oestrogen receptors [49]. Oestrogen and androgen
receptors were detectable in porcine foetal ovaries; therefore, ste-
roid hormones can exert their direct impact on the ovarian devel-
opment [ 50,51]. The ovarian effects of foetal oestrogen and
testosterone excess are remarkably similar to those noticed after
HMB treatment. Moreover, it was documented previously that
progesterone inhibited the assembly of primordial follicles [ 52].
The increased P4 levels suggest that it might contribute to the
diminished the pool of primordial follicles in newborn piglets. The
accelerated follicular development observed in ovaries of piglets
prenatally exposed to HMB was associated with an increase in the
percentage of developing follicles with PCNA and Ki67-positive
granulosa cells. Moreover, the Ki67 and PCNA proliferation index
of granulosa cells in transitional follicles was signi ﬁcantly higher in
the HMB-exposed ovaries, which indicates that HMB can be
involved in granulosa cell proliferation. It is well documented that
HMB exerts an effect on proliferation and differentiation of chon-
droblasts, osteoblasts [ 35,36], myoblasts [ 53], and muscle satellite
cells [ 54]. Surprisingly, the level of Ki67 protein expression was
signiﬁcantly lower in the whole ovarian homogenates from the
HMB-treated group than in the control. This discrepancy may result
from a lower percentage of Ki67-positive oocytes within egg nests
observed in the HMB-treated group, compared with the control.
Furthermore, the current study reported that the HMB-exposed
ovaries had a signi ﬁcantly higher level of StAR expression than
the control group. StAR is an essential protein involved in ste-
roidogenesis [ 55]; therefore, it can be speculated that HMB can
participate in this process. However, the key enzymes important in
steroid biosynthesis need to be investigated. It seems that the
higher level of gonadotropins and steroid hormones found in HMB-
treated piglets may stimulate granulosa cell proliferation and dif-
ferentiation, which promotes follicle transition.
It is considered that follicular development from the primordial
pool is a process not dependent on gonadotropins [ 56]. However,
there is data that documents the role of gonadotropins in the early
stage of folliculogenesis. FSH can indirectly act in the primordial
follicles through paracrine factors secreted by follicular or stromal
cells, such as Kit ligand [ 57]. Furthermore, LH contributes to
increased androgen synthesis in foetal bovine and porcine ovaries
[58,59]. Increased stimulation of gonadotropins may contribute to
an accelerated rate of follicle recruitment. However, if such accel-
erated follicle recruitment continues into adult life without
compensatory reduction in follicular atresia, premature reproduc-
tive senescence may occur.
Considering the studies conducted so far in both humans and
animals, HMB has been recognized as a safe dietary supplement
inducing muscle hypertrophy [31] and improving skeletal [ 35e42],
cardiovascular [60], and muscular system properties [ 20,28,61,62].
Furthermore, HMB increased the weight of internal organs and
birth weight of piglets [ 35,36] and neonatal spiny mouse [ 63].
Flummer et al. [ 30], who determined the effect of prenatal HMB
supplementation on the piglet body composition, pointed out that
the higher liver and spleen mass might be associated with
increased liver metabolic capacity and improved immune system
function in the spleen. The present study also con ﬁrms that the
prenatal exposure to HMB caused an increase in the birth weight
and ovary weight of newborn piglets. Furthermore, the
Table 4
Effect of prenatal HMB supplementation on the percentage of developing follicles with PCNA/Ki67-positive oocytes and granulosa cells (GC) in the ov aries of newborn piglets.
Ovarian follicles Control HMB
oocyte GC oocyte GC
primordial PCNA 59.8 ± 3.1 e 46.0 ± 5.7*** e
Ki67 eee e
primary PCNA 18.3 ± 4.4 9.5 ± 1.5 24.6 ± 2.3** 12.7 ± 1.6**
Ki67 e 9.3 ± 1.1 e 11.0 ± 1.3*
transitional PCNA 8.6 ± 1.1 47.0 ± 6.4 8.8 ± 1.4 61.5 ± 3.4***
Ki67 e 53.4 ± 5.2 e 60.1 ± 3.5*
Data is presented as mean ± SD.; P-values less than 0.05 from the Mann-Whitney test are indicated *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. GC e granulosa cells.
Table 5
Effect of prenatal HMB supplementation on the proliferation index of granulosa cells
within ovarian follicles in newborn piglets.
Ovarian follicles Proliferation index, %
Control HMB
PCNA Ki67 PCNA Ki67
primary 17.9 ± 8.0 16.6 ± 3.8 21.7 ± 6.0 16.4 ± 5.4
transitional 29.3 ± 4.8 28.9 ± 3.1 38.3 ± 7.3*** 34.1 ± 8.5**
Data is presented as mean ± SD.; P-values less than 0.05 from the Mann-Whitney
test are indicated **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Fig. 6. Protein expression in the ovaries obtained from control and HMB-treated
newborn piglets. A . Relative abundance of Ki67, E-cadherin, PCNA, StAR, Bax, Bcl-2,
and active caspase-3 was evaluated densitometrically and expressed as the ratio
relative to b-actin. Data is presented as mean ± SD. P values less than 0.05 from Mann-
Whitney test are indicated *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. B. Representative
Western blots of examined proteins in the ovaries obtained from the control and the
HMB-treated group.
M. Hu łas-Stasiak et al. / Theriogenology 128 (2019) 91 e100 97

=== PAGE 10 ===
histomorphometric analysis showed a higher ovarian cross-
sectional area and a higher medullar cell/collagen ﬁber ratio in
the HMB-treated group, compared with the control. Thus, it is
possible that HMB can stimulate ovarian stromal cell hypertrophy.
This structural and metabolic acceleration may be a result of an
increase in the endocrine system activity during the prenatal
period in piglets.
However, apart from a huge number of positive HMB effects
described in literature, there is data reporting that prenatally
administered HMB can exert a harmful effect on the brain of male
spiny mouse ( Acomys cahirinus ) offspring [ 64]. The present study
also documented that HMB applied during the porcine foetal
period may impair ovarian development. Dysregulation of the
endocrine axis, causing a signi ﬁcant increase in the level of circu-
lating gonadotropins (FSH, LH) and steroid hormones (17 b-estra-
diol, testosterone, and progesterone) can lead to reduction of
oocyte nests and primordial follicles in the ovaries of newborn
piglets. The depletion of oocytes or primordial follicles in the
cortical layer led to a decrease in the cortex-to-medulla ratio
observed in the HMB-treated group. Furthermore, a higher
apoptotic index of oocytes within the breakdown nests was esti-
mated in the HMB group, compared to the control group. Surpris-
ingly, the percentage of PCNA-positive oocytes within the total egg
nests was higher, while the percentage of Ki67-positive oocytes
was lower after the HMB treatment. In contrast, the percentage of
PCNA- and Ki67-positive oocytes within the total egg nests of the
control group was comparable. The proliferating cell nuclear anti-
gen (PCNA) is a non-histone nuclear protein used as a biomarker of
cell proliferation. Additionally, this protein acts as a cofactor of DNA
polymerase delta and is involved in many essential cellular pro-
cesses, such as DNA replication and repair, cell cycle control, and
cell death or survival [ 65]. Thus, the data presented here may
suggest that PCNA can be involved not only in granulosa cell pro-
liferation but also, more surprisingly, in oocyte apoptosis. Both the
control and the HMB-treated group had a higher percentage of
PCNA-positive oocytes than Ki67 within the breakdown egg nests.
Indeed, some data has implicated a crucial role of PCNA in
apoptosis-mediated oocyte loss during primordial follicle forma-
tion in neonatal mouse [ 66]. PCNA has been documented to
participate actively in the regulation of apoptosis, either by pro-
moting pro-apoptotic or suppressing anti-apoptotic proteins in
cells [67].
Surprisingly, the ﬁndings from this study clearly showed that
the expression of active caspase-3 and the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio were
signiﬁcantly lower in the HMB-treated group than in the control.
This is in agreement with the study of Kornasio et al. [ 53], who also
observed reduced caspase-3 activity in myoblast cells after HMB
treatment. However, the exact mechanism by which PCNA regu-
lates apoptosis of oocytes during primordial follicle formation re-
mains unknown and needs to be further evaluated. The data
presented here suggests that a caspase-3-independent pathway
can be involved in activation of apoptosis of oocyte egg nests after
prenatal HMB supplementation. Witko-Sarsat et al. [ 68] reported
that PCNA in mature neutrophils is constitutively associated with
procaspase 3, 8, 9, and 10 and presumably sequesters them in the
cytosol, which prevents their activation into the active form of
caspases.
E-cadherins seem to be an important factor in primordial follicle
assembly and are involved in oocyte-granulosa cell communication
[69]. The results of the present study imply that E-cadherin proteins
localised at the oocyte-oocyte contact sites within egg nests are
required to maintain the egg nest structure and that their disas-
sembly initiates oocyte nest breakdown. E-cadherin immuno-
staining was strongly detected in the egg nests, furthermore, the
intensity of this staining decreased during the oocyte nest break-
down and follicular development, which is accordance with similar
ﬁndings reported in mouse [ 6], hamster [ 7], and rat [ 70] foetal and
neonatal ovaries. Therefore, this study suggests that HMB acceler-
ates oocyte nest breakdown and leads to reduction in E-cadherin
expression, which was con ﬁrmed by the western blotting analysis.
5. Conclusions
In conclusion, the obtained results do not con ﬁrm the hypoth-
esis of the positive effect of HMB on porcine ovarian morphogen-
esis. The present study suggests that HMB administered to sows
during the period between gestation days 70 and 90 may have
adverse effects on early folliculogenesis in 1-day-old piglets. HMB
reduced the pool of primordial follicles and increased follicular
recruitment. These alterations may lead to premature depletion of
germ cell reserve resulting in reproductive failure. Therefore, it
would be interesting to determine if these ovarian changes initiated
during prenatal life have long-lasting consequences in adult
reproductive performance. These studies open a discussion about
the bene ﬁts and risks of the diet supplemented with HMB and its
potential application in medicine and animal husbandry. Further
research in this area is strongly recommended.
Conﬂicts of interest
The authors do not have any con ﬂict of interest.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Science Centre (NCN,
Poland, grant no. 2017/01/X/NZ3/01055).
References
[1] Ashworth CHJ, Toma LM, Hunter MG. Nutritional effects on oocyte and em-
bryo development in mammals: implications for reproductive ef ﬁciency and
environmental sustainability. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 2009;364:
3351e61. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0184.
[2] Evans AC, Mossa F, Walsh SW, Scheetz D, Jimenez-Krassel F, Ireland JL, et al.
Effects of maternal environment during gestation on ovarian folliculogenesis
and consequences for fertility in bovine offspring. Reprod Domest Anim
2012;47:31e7. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0531.2012.02052.x.
[3] Shiyan S, Yimin J, Bin H, Runsheng L, Xian L, Demin C. Maternal low-protein
diet alters ovarian expression of folliculogenic and steroidogenic genes and
their regulatory microRNAs in neonatal piglets. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci
2014;27:1695e704. https://doi.org/105713/ajas.2014.14335.
[4] Xu M, Che L, Yang Z, Zhang P, Shi J, Li J, et al. Effect of high fat dietary intake
during maternal gestation on offspring ovarian health in a pig model. Nutri-
ents 2016;8:E498. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu8080498.
[5] Okamura D, Kimura T, Nakano T, Matsui Y. Cadherin-mediated cell interaction
regulates germ cell determination in mice. Development 2003;130:6423 e30.
https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.00870.
[6] Niu W, Wang Y, Wang Z, Xin Q, Wang Y, Feng L, et al. JNK signalling regulates
E-cadherin junctions in germline cysts and determines primordial follicle
formation in mice. Development 2016;143:1778 e87. https://doi.org/10.1242/
dev.132175.
[7] Wang C, Roy SK. Expression of E-cadherin and N-cadherin in perinatal
Table 6
Effect of prenatal HMB supplementation on hormone concentration in blood serum
of newborn piglets.
Hormone Control HMB
FSH, IU/L 18.7 ± 1.3 39.1 ± 3.8***
LH, ng/ml 1.0 ± 0.01 1.8 ± 0.3**
17b-estradiol, ng/ml 1.1 ± 0.05 1.8 ± 0.1**
Testosterone, ng/ml 0.09 ± 0.004 0.2 ± 0.04***
Progesterone, ng/ml 28.6 ± 2.4 34.6 ± 4.7*
Data is presented as mean ± SD.; P-values less than 0.05 from the Mann-Whitney
test are indicated *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
M. Hu łas-Stasiak et al. / Theriogenology 128 (2019) 91 e10098
hamster ovary: possible involvement in primordial follicle formation and
regulation by follicle-stimulating hormone. Endocrinology 2010;151:
2319e30. https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2009-1489.
[8] Ryan PL, Valentine AF, Bagnell CA. Expression of epithelial cadherin in the
developing and adult pig ovary. Biol Reprod 1996;55:1091 e7.
[9] Ortiz R, Echeverria OM, Salgado R, Escobar ML, Vasquez-Nin GH. Fine struc-
tural and cytochemical analysis of the process of cell death of oocytes in
atretic follicles in newborn and prepubertal rats. Apoptosis 2006;11:25 e37.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10495-005-3347-0.
[10] Ghafari F, Gutierrez CG, Hartshorne GM. Apoptosis in mouse foetal and
neonatal oocytes during meiotic prophase one. BMC Dev Biol 2007;7:87.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-213X-7-87.
[11] Escobar ML, Echeverría OM, Ortíz R, V /C19asquez-Nin GH. Combined apoptosis
and autophagy, the process that eliminates the oocytes of atretic follicles in
immature rats. Apoptosis 2008;13:1253 e66. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10495-
008-0248-z.
[12] Rodrigues P, Limback D, McGinnis LK, Plancha CE, Albertini DF. Multiple
mechanisms of germ cell loss in the perinatal mouse ovary. Reproduction
2009;137:709e20. https://doi.org/10.1530/REP-08-0203.
[13] Hu łas-Stasiak M, Dobrowolski P, Tamaszewska E, Kostro K. Maternal acryl-
amide treatment reduces ovarian follicle number in newborn Guinea pig
offspring. Reprod Toxicol 2013;42:125 e31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
reprotox.2013.08.007.
[14] Shi Y. Mechanisms of caspase activation and inhibition during apoptosis. Mol
Cell 2002;9:459 e70. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1097-2765(02)00482-3.
[15] Sugino N, Okuda K. Species-related differences in the mechanism of apoptosis
during structural luteolysis. J Reprod Dev 2007;53:977 e86. https://doi.org/10.
1262/jrd.19047.
[16] Zhang Z, Rathmachr J, Coates C, Nissen S. Distribution of the leucine metab-
olite beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate in foods and feeds. FASEB J 1994;8:
A464.
[17] Nissen S, Abumrad NN. Nutritional role of the leucine metabolite beta-
hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate (HMB). J Nutr Biochem 1997;8:300 e11.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0955-2863(97)00048-X.
[18] Szcze /C19sniak KA, Ostaszewski P, Fuller JC, Ciecierska A, Sadkowski T. Dietary
supplementation of b-hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate in animals - a review.
J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 2015;99:405 e17. https://doi.org/10.1111/jpn.
12234.
[19] Van Koevering M, Nissen S. Oxidation of leucine and a-ketoisocaproate to
beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate in vivo. Am J Physiol 1992;262:E27 e31.
https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.1992.262.1.E27.
[20] Nissen SL, Sharp RL. Effect of dietary supplements on lean mass and strength
gains with resistance exercise: a meta-analysis. J Appl Physiol 1985;94:
651e9. https://doi.org/0.1152/japplphysiol.00755.2002.
[21] Wilson GJ, Wilson JM, Manninen AH. Effects of beta-hydroxy-beta-
methylbutyrate (HMB) on exercise performance and body composition
across varying levels of age, sex, and training experience: a review. Nutr
Metab 2008;5:1. https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-7075-5-1.
[22] Wilson JM, Fitschen PJ, Campbell B, Wilson GJ, Zanchi N, Taylor L, et al. In-
ternational society of sports nutrition position stand: beta-hydroxy-beta-
methylbutyrate (HMB). J Int Soc Sports Nutr 2013;10:6. https://doi.org/10.
1186/1550-2783-10-6.
[23] Mu /C21glali €OH, Salman M, Gacar A, Akda /C21g F, Gülbahar MY, Çiftçi A, et al. In ovo
feeding with b-hydroxy b-methylbutyrate and broiler performance, intestinal
health, and immunity status. Turk J Vet Anim Sci 2016;40:28 e33. https://doi.
org/10.3906/vet-1506-95.
[24] Tako E, Ferket PR, Uni Z. Effects of in ovo feeding of carbohydrates and beta-
hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate on the development of chicken intestine.
Poultry Sci 2004;83:2023 e8. https://doi.org/10.1093/ps/83.12.2023.
[25] Cie /C19slak D, Nieradka-Iwanicka B. b-Hydroxy- b-methylbutyrate (HMB) sup-
plementation during pregnancy and perinatal period in animals studies and
possible application in humans. J Educ Health Sport 2018;8:11 e8. https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.1183841.
[26] Wan H, Zhu J, Shen Y, Xiang X, Yin H, Fang Z, et al. Effects of dietary sup-
plementation of b-hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate on sow performance and mRNA
expression of myogenic markers in skeletal muscle of neonatal piglets. Reprod
Domest Anim 2016;51:134 e42. https://doi.org/10.1111/rda.12657.
[27] Wan H, Zhu J, Su G, Liu Y, Hua L, Hu L, et al. Dietary supplementation with b-
hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate calcium during the early postnatal period accel-
erates skeletal muscle ﬁber growth and maturity in intra-uterine growth-
retarded and normal-birth-weight piglets. Br J Nutr 2016;115:1360 e9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007114516000465.
[28] Wan H, Zhu J, Wu C, Zhou P, Shen Y, Lin Y, et al. Transfer of b-hydroxy-b-
methylbutyrate from sows to their offspring and its impact on muscle ﬁbre
type transformation and performance in pigs. J Anim Sci Biotechnol 2017;8:2.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40104-016-0132-6.
[29] Wheatley SM, El-Kadi SW, Suryawan A, Boutry C, Orellana RA, Nguyen HV,
et al. Protein synthesis in skeletal muscle of neonatal pig is enhanced by
administration of b-hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate. AJP Endocrinol Metab
2014;306:E91e9. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.00500.2013.
[30] Flummer C, Kristensen NB, Theil PK. Body composition of piglets from sows
fed the leucine metabolite b-hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate in late gestation.
J Anim Sci 2012;90:442 e4. https://doi.org/10.2527/jas.53923.
[31] Pimentel GD, Rosa JC, Lira FS, Zanchi NE, Ropelle ER, Oyama LM, et al. b-hy-
droxy-b-methylbutyrate (HMB) supplementation stimulates skeletal muscle
hypertrophy in rats via the mTOR pathway. Nutr Metab 2011;8:11. https://
doi.org/10.1186/1743-7075-8-11.
[32] Tatara MR, Krupski W, Tymczyna B, Studzi /C19nski T. Effects of combined
maternal administration with alpha-ketoglutarate (AKG) and b-hydroxy b-
methylbutyrate (HMB) on prenatal programming of skeletal properties in the
offspring. Nutr Metab 2012;9:39. https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-7075-9-39.
[33] Gerlinger-Romero F, Guimar ~aes-Ferreira L, Giannocco G, Nunes MT. Chronic
supplementation of beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate (HMB) increases the
activity of the GH/IGF-1 axis and induces hyperinsulinemia in rats. Growth
Hormone IGF Res 2011;21:57 e62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ghir.2010.12.006.
[34] W /C19ojcik R, Ma łaczewska J, Siwicki AK, Mici /C19nski J, Zwierzchowski G. The effect
of b-hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate (HMB) on the proliferative response of blood
lymphocytes and the phagocytic activity of blood monocytes and gran-
ulocytes in calves. Pol J Vet Sci 2013;16:567 e9. https://doi.org/10.2478/pjvs-
2013-0078.
[35] Tatara MR, /C19Sliwa E, Krupski W. Prenatal programming of skeletal develop-
ment in the offspring: effects of maternal treatment with b-hydroxy-b-
methylbutyrate (HMB) on femur properties in pigs at slaughter age. Bone
2007;40:1615e22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2007.02.018.
[36] Blicharski T, Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Hu łas-Stasiak M, Muszy /C19nski S.
A metabolite of leucine ( b-hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate) given to sows during
pregnancy alters bone development of their newborn offspring by hormonal
modulation. PLoS One 2017;12, e0179693. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0179693.
[37] Nissen S, Faidley TD, Zimmerman DR, Izard R, Fisher CT. Colostral milk fat
percentage and pig performance are enhanced by feeding the leucine
metabolite beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate to sows. J Anim Sci 1994;72:
2331e7.
[38] Tatara MR, Sliwa E, Krupski W. Prenatal programming of skeletal develop-
ment in the offspring: effects of maternal treatment with beta-hydroxy-beta-
methylbutyrate (HMB) on femur properties in pigs at slaughter age. Bone
2007;40:1615e22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2007.02.018.
[39] /C19Swietlicka I, Muszy /C19nski S, Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Kwa /C19sniewska A,
/C19Swietlicki M, et al. Prenatally administered HMB modi ﬁes the enamel surface
roughness in spiny mice offspring: an Atomic Force Microscopy study. Arch
Oral Biol 2016;70:24 e31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.archoralbio.2016.06.001.
[40] Biela/C19nska-Osuchowska Z. Oogenesis in pig ovaries during the prenatal period:
ultrastructure and morphometry. Reprod Biol 2006;6:161 e93.
[41] Rentsch C, Schneiders W, Manthey S, Rentsch B, Rammelt S. Comprehensive
histological evaluation of bone implants. Biomatter 2014;4:e2799. https://doi.
org/10.4161/biom.27993.
[42] Tingen C, Kim A, Woodruff TK. The primordial pool of follicles and nest
breakdown in mammalian ovaries. Mol Hum Reprod 2009;15:795 e803.
https://doi.org/10.1093/molehr/gap073.
[43] Pedersen T, Peters H. Proposal for a classi ﬁcation of oocytes and follicles in the
mouse ovary. Reproduction 1968;17:555 e7. https://doi.org/10.1530/jrf.0.
0170555.
[44] Bradford MM. A rapid and sensitive method for quanti ﬁcation of microgram
quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-die binding. Anal Bio-
chem 1976;72:248 e54. https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-2697(76)90527-3.
[45] Tatara M. Neonatal programming of skeletal development in sheep is medi-
ated by somatotrophic axis function. Exp Physiol 2008;93:763 e72. https://
doi.org/10.1113/expphysiol.2007.041145.
[46] Abbott DH, Padmanabhan V, Dumesic DA. Contributions of androgen and
estrogen to fetal programming of ovarian dysfunction. Reprod Biol Endocrinol
2006;4:17. https://doi.org/10.1186/1477-7827-4-17.
[47] Knapczyk-Stwora K, Durlej-Grzesiak M, Ciereszko RE, Koziorowski M,
Slomczynska M. Antiandrogen ﬂutamide affects folliculogenesis during fetal
development in pigs. Reproduction 2013;145:265 e76.
[48] Steckler T, Wang J, Bartol FF, Roy SK, Padmanabhan V. Fetal programming:
prenatal testosterone treatment causes intrauterine growth retardation, re-
duces ovarian reserve and increases ovarian follicular recruitment. Endocri-
nology 2005;146:3185 e93. https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2004-1444.
[49] Walters KA, Allan CM, Handelsman DJ. Androgen actions and the ovary. Biol
Reprod 2008;78:380 e9. https://doi.org/10.1095/biolreprod.107.064089.
[50] Knapczyk K, Duda M, Szafranska B, Wolsza K, Panasiewicz G, Koziorowski M,
Slomczynska M. Immunolocalisation of oestrogen receptors alpha (ERalpha)
and beta (ERbeta) in porcine embryos and fetuses at different stages of
gestation. Acta Vet Hung 2008;56:221 e33. https://doi.org/10.1556/AVet.56.
2008.2.10.
[51] Burek M, Duda M, Knapczyk K, Koziorowski M, S łomczy/C19nska M. Tissue-spe-
ciﬁc distribution of the androgen receptor (AR) in the porcine fetus. Acta
Histochem 2007;109:358 e65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acthis.2007.03.003.
[52] Nilsson E, Skinner MK. Progesterone regulation of primordial follicle assembly
in bovine fetal ovaries. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2009;313:9 e16. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.mce.2009.09.004.
[53] Kornasio R, Riederer I, Butler-Browne G, Mouly V, Uni Z, Halevy O. b-hydroxy-
b-methylbutyrate (HMB) stimulates myogenic cell proliferation, differentia-
tion and survival via the MAPK/ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways. Biochim Biophys
Acta 2009;1793:755 e63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.12.017.
[54] Alway SE, Pereira SL, Edens NK, Hao Y, Bennett BT. b-hydroxy-b-methyl-
butyrate (HMB) enhances the proliferation of satellite cells in fast muscles of
aged rats during recovery from disuse atrophy. Exp Gerontol 2013;48:
973e84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exger.2013.06.005.
[55] Stocco DM. StAR protein and the regulation of steroid hormone biosynthesis.
M. Hu łas-Stasiak et al. / Theriogenology 128 (2019) 91 e100 99

=== PAGE 11 ===
Annu Rev Phsiol 2001;63:193 e213. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.physiol.
63.1.193.
[56] Messinis IE, Messini C, Dafopoulos K. The role of gonadotropins in the follic-
ular phase. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2010;1205:5 e11. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-
6632.2010.05660.x.
[57] Thomas FH, Ethier J-F, Shimasaki S, Vanderhyden BC. Follicle-stimulating
hormone regulates oocyte growth by modulation of expression of oocyte and
granulosa cell factors. Endocrinology 2005;146:941 e9. https://doi.org/10.
1210/en.2004-0826.
[58] Allen JJ, Herrick SL, Fortune JE. Regulation of steroidogenesis in fetal bovine
ovaries: differential effects of LH and FSH. J Mol Endocrinol 2016;57:275 e86.
https://doi.org/0.1530/JME-16-0152.
[59] Raeside JI. Gonadotropic stimulation of androgen secretion by the early fetal
pig ovary in organ culture. Biol Reprod 1983;28:128 e33.
[60] Nissen S, Sharp RL, Panton L, Vukovich M, Trappe S, Fuller Jr JC. Beta-hydroxy-
beta-methylbutyrate (HMB) supplementation in humans is safe and may
decrease cardiovascular risk factors. J Nutr 2000;130:1937 e45. https://doi.
org/10.1093/jn/130.8.1937.
[61] Wilkinson DJ, Hossain T, Hill DS, Phillips BE, Crossland H, Williams J, et al.
Effects of leucine and its metabolite b-hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate on human
skeletal protein metabolism. J Physiol 2013;591:2911 e23. https://doi.org/10.
1113/jphysiol.2013.253203.
[62] Nissen S, Sharp R, Ray M, Rathmacher JA, Rice D, Fuller Jr JC, et al. Effect of
leucine metabolite beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate on muscle metabolism
during resistance-exercise training. J Appl Physiol 1996;81:2095 e104.
https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.1996.81.5.2095.
[63] Muszy/C19nski S, Tomczyk A, Dobrowolski P, Tomaszewska E, Hu łas-Stasiak M.
Preliminary study of time-dependent in ﬂuence of maternal nutrition with
addition of beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate on the body weight and
selected organs weight in the new-born spiny mice (Acomys cahirinus)
offspring. Electr J Pol Agric Univ 2016;19(4):08 .
[64] Krawczyk A, Rycerz K, Jaworska-Adamu J, Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P.
Calretinin expression in hippocampus of mouse offspring from dams treated
with b-hydroxy-b-methylbutyrate. Med Weter 2016;72:423 e9. https://doi.
org/10.21521/mw.5535.
[65] Maga G, Hübscher U. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA): a dancer with
many partners. J Cell Sci 2003;116:3051 e60. https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.
00653.
[66] Xu B, Hua J, Zhang Y, Jiang X, Zhang H, Ma T, et al. Proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA) regulates primordial follicle assembly by promoting apoptosis
of oocytes in fetal and neonatal mouse ovaries. PLoS One 2011;6, e16046.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016046.
[67] Vairapandi M, Azam N, Balliet AG, Hoffman B, Liebermann DA. Characteriza-
tion of MyD118, Gadd45 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) inter-
acting domains. PCNA impedes MyD118 and Gadd45-mediated negative
growth control. J Biol Chem 2000;275:16810 e9.
[68] Witko-Sarsat V, Pederzoli-Ribeil M, Hirsh E, Sozzani S, Cassatella MA. Regu-
lating neutrophil apoptosis: new players enter the game. Trends Immunol
2011;32:117e24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.it.2011.01.001.
[69] De Carlo A, De Felici M. A role for E-cadherin in mouse primordial germ cell
development. Dev Biol 2000;226:209 e19. https://doi.org/10.1006/dbio.2000.
9861.
[70] Machell NH, Blaschuk OW, Farookhi R. Developmental expression and dis-
tribution of N- and E-cadherin in the rat ovary. Biol Reprod 2000;63:797 e804.
https://doi.org/10.1095/biolreprod63.3.797.
M. Hu łas-Stasiak et al. / Theriogenology 128 (2019) 91 e10010 0
Research Article Open Access
Tomaszewska et al., J Neonatal Biol 2015, 4:3 
DOI: 10.4172/2167-0897.1000183
Volume 4 • Issue 3 • 1000183
J Neonatal Biol
ISSN: 2167-0897 JNB, an open access journal 
Maternal Nutrition with Β-Hydroxy-Β-Methylbutyrate as Strong 
Determinants of the Development of Newborn Offspring in Pigs
Ewa Tomaszewska1*, Piotr Dobrowolski2, Monika Hułas-Stasiak2 and Agnieszka Tomczyk1
1Department of Animal Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Lublin, Poland
2Department of Comparative Anatomy and Anthropology, Maria Curie-Skłodowska University, Lublin, Poland
Keywords: β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate; Piglets; Postnatal
development
Introduction
Adaptive, functional, structural and metabolic changes appearing 
during prenatal development as an effect of interaction between genes 
and environmental factors play dual function. They enhance the chance 
of newborns survival under suboptimal conditions during prenatal 
time and influence postnatal development. Changes of physiological 
processes of the prenatal development influence postnatal growth and 
adaptive possibilities of organism. Developmental alterations depend 
on the phase of development, genetic sensitivity of foetus and the 
condition of the pregnant [1-4]. The moment of the action of factors 
determines a type of alterations, because each organ has its own critical 
period, when its development may be changed. Interferences into 
maternal nutrient are used in studies related to prenatal programming 
- permanent changes in homeostasis of regulatory physiological
mechanisms [5].
The positive impact of specific compounds in food is evident. Among 
these specific compounds, there is the bioactive metabolite of leucine 
(HMB, β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate). Approximately 5% of leucine 
metabolism leads to endogenous synthesis of HMB, which serves as 
a key carbon source for de novo cholesterol synthesis in tissues, which 
is necessary to maintain maximal cell function [6-8]. Earlier studies 
on rats have shown that dietary supplementation with HMB results in 
enhanced wound collagen deposition. Similar results were obtained in 
another study on humans, where HMB administration enhanced the 
hydroxyproline content, thereby increasing wound repair processes 
[9]. Nutritional elements can influence bone metabolism and intestinal 
development [10]. Maternal administration with HMB has positive 
long-term effects on the skeletal system in offspring improving bone 
mineral density as well as the geometrical and mechanical properties 
[11]. Several studies also have shown that HMB modulates protein 
turnover [6,7].
The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of HMB maternal 
administration on body characteristic of newborn offspring.
Material and Methods
The experiment was approved by The Local Ethics Committee on 
Animal Experimentation of University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Poland.
Pregnant sows
Clinically healthy 8 multiparous sows of Pulawska breed were sired 
by the same boar and singly housed in the separated cages under standard 
rearing conditions (controlled temperature, humidity and 12:12-h light-
dark cycle) with free access to fresh water and fed twice a day with well 
balanced standard commercial diet for pregnant and lactating sows (2.3 
kg/day/sow). 
To investigate detrimental effects of maternal nutrition treatment on 
the growth of newborn offspring, HMB administration was performed 
in sows during the period lasting between 70th and 90th days of gestation 
in pigs (115-116 days). Sows were randomly assigned into two group the 
control group (n=4; PhS-sows) not administered with HMB and the 
experimental group (n=6; HMB-treated sows) fed with HMB in the 
morning (0.2 mg/kg of body weight/ every day; Sigma). 
Abstract
Aim: Interferences into maternal nutrient are used in studies related to prenatal programming - permanent changes 
in homeostasis of regulatory physiological mechanisms. Thus, the effect of HMB (β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate) maternal 
administration on body characteristic in newborn offspring was studied. 
Methods: Sows were fed with a standard diet and diet supplemented with HMB (0.2 mg/kg of body weight/ every 
day) in the morning meals from 70th to 90th day of gestation. Twenty four newborn piglets were weight and euthanized, 
organ weights were recorded. Moreover, changes in the somatotropin axis were assessed by determination of insulin-
like growth factor 1.
Results: Maternal HMB supplementation significantly affected weight at birth. The weight of the liver was increased 
by 160% in the HMB piglets (P < 0.01) compared with Cont piglets, and the spleen was 67% heavier in HMB piglets (P < 
0.01). The weight of the kidneys, lungs, heart and stomach was increased for the HMB piglets by 55%, 115%, 56% and 
63%; whereas the weights of brain not affected by HMB supplementation. The concentration of IGF 1 also increased 
after maternal HMB supplementation (by 214%). 
Conclusion: The study showed that maternal HMB supplementation in middle gestation had marked effects on 
characteristics of the newborn offspring.
*Corresponding author: Ewa Tomaszewska, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, 
Lublin, Poland, Tel: +48 4456973; Fax: +48 4456973; E-mail: ewaRST@interia.pl; 
ewa.tomaszewska@up.lublin.pl
Received July 06, 2015; Accepted July 21, 2015; Published July 31, 2015
Citation: Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Hułas-Stasiak M, Tomczyk A (2015) 
Maternal Nutrition with Β-Hydroxy-Β-Methylbutyrate as Strong Determinants 
of the Development of Newborn Offspring in Pigs. J Neonatal Biol 4: 183. 
doi:10.4172/2167-0897.1000183
Copyright: © 2015 Tomaszewska E, et al. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which 
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided 
the original author and source are credited.
Journal of Neonatal Biology
ISSN: 2167-0897
Journal of Neonatal Biology

=== PAGE 12 ===
Citation: Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Hułas-Stasiak M, Tomczyk A (2015) Maternal Nutrition with Β-Hydroxy-Β-Methylbutyrate as Strong 
Determinants of the Development of Newborn Offspring in Pigs. J Neonatal Biol 4: 183. doi:10.4172/2167-0897.1000183
Pge 2 of 3
Volume 4 • Issue 3 • 1000183
J Neonatal Biol
ISSN: 2167-0897 JNB, an open access journal 
Piglets
The study was performed on 12 male and female piglets born by 
the control sows as a control group (3 newborns of both sexes from 
each sow) and 12 male and female piglets born by HMB-treated sows 
(2 newborns of both sexes from each sow). At the birth, piglets were 
weight and euthanized by intravenous injection of lethal dose of 
pentobarbitalum natrium (Morbital, Biowet, Puławy, Poland). Basal 
vital organs such as liver, heart, lungs, spleen, stomach, kidneys and 
brain were isolated and weight. Relative organs mass (%) was calculated 
as a ratio of organ weight and body weight.
The concentration of insulin-like growth factor 1
Changes in the somatotropin axis were assessed by determination 
of insulin-like growth factor 1. Each newborn pig was not fasted 
before blood collection. The animal blood was collected using 
standard venepuncture; next, after clotting at room temperature, it 
was centrifuged and frozen at -80°C for further analysis. All samples 
were determined in duplicate. The concentration of the serum porcine 
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) was determined in an IGF-1 
kit (ELISA; Uscn Life Science Inc. Wuhan, China). The minimum 
detection was 7.8 ng/mL.
Statistical Analysis
All the results are expressed as means ± SD (standard deviation). 
Differences between the means were tested with the One Way ANOVA 
and post hoc Tukey’s test as the correction for multiple comparisons. 
Normal distribution of data was examined using the W. Shapiro-Wilk 
test and equality of variance was tested by the Brown-Forsythe test. If 
there was a lack of normal distribution and/or unequal variance of data, 
the Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA was used. A P-value of less than 0.05 was 
considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were carried 
out by means of STATISTICA 8.0 software (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK, 
USA).
Results
HMB administration did not influence the gestation length, the 
mean number of stillborn and live born piglets in litters delivered by 
HMB-treated sows. 
Body and organs weight 
Maternal HMB treatment significantly increased body mass (57%) 
and absolute weights all the vital organs except brain in newborn piglets 
when compared to the control animals (Table 1). The weight of liver, 
heart, lungs, spleen, stomach and kidneys increases by 160%, 56%, 
115%, 67%, 63% and 55%, respectively compared to the control group 
(Table 1). Although, when relative weight of organ was compared, 
there was no difference (Table 2).
The concentration of IGF-1
Maternal HMB supplementation significantly enhanced the 
concentration of IGF 1 in newborn offspring, in which reached the 
value of 2860 ± 880 pg/mL, while in the control group amounted 910 
± 396 pg/mL. 
Discussion
Commonly available food stuffs are generally poor in β-hydroxy-
β-methylbutyrate. The highest amount of this substance was found in 
grapefruit and alfalfa. Other food stuffs like corn consist of HMB in 
trace amounts of the product [12-14]. Although, the use of substances 
that have a physiological and nutritional effects, it should only be 
complementary to the proper diet. In many cases, however, it is 
impossible to effectively cover the body’s increased demand for energy 
and nutrients exclusively by standard and conventional diet. It requires 
the use of supplements in practice [15-17]. 
In our study, HMB was administered to pregnant sows in the 
amount of 0.2 g/kg of body weight. This maternal supplementation 
enhanced body weight of newborns approximately 1.5 fold [11]. In 
earlier study, where HMB has been given in the amount of 0.05 g/kg of 
body weight per day, newborns were heavier only about 23% compared 
to the control group. But, the time of administration differed from this 
used in presented study. Earlier administration of HMB was performed 
two weeks before delivery, in the present study HMB was given in the 
middle gestation through 20 days.
So far conducted studies have shown, that supplementation with 
HMB is safe even with supply exceeding most often recommended dose 
and do not affect the appearance of side effects in both humans and 
animals [18]. Many studies, indicate a significant effect of HMB on the 
weight and body composition because of anti-catabolic effect, resulting 
from the stimulation of the synthesis and inhibiting the degradation of 
muscle protein [19, 20].
In our study, the weight of basal vital organs of newborns offspring 
was proportional to body size (there was no difference in relative 
weight) and the concentration one of the markers of somatotropic axis. 
The supplementation of HMB significantly enhanced the weight of 
vital organs, although there was no difference in consuming amount of 
food between groups of pregnant sows. However, additional studies are 
needed to clarify the mechanisms of the maternal action of HMB on the 
activity of somatotropic axis. 
This study showed that, maternal HMB supplementation in middle 
gestation significantly improved general growth of offspring influencing 
somatotropic axis, but the influence of a diet rich in metabolite of 
leucine should be further investigated. Maternal administration with 
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) during middle gestation has been 
shown to improve body and basal vital organs mass.
The weight Cont HMB
Body [g] 902.5±91.1 1424.0±126.0*
Liver [g] 17.89±1.89 46.56±6.1*
Heart [g] 6.48±0.60 10.15±1.13*
Lungs [g] 10.69±1.42 22.2±1.85*
Spleen [g] 0.76±0.10 1.27±0.23*
Stomach [g] 5.54±0.64 9.03±0.73*
Kidneys [g] 7.0±1.0 10.88±0.70*
Brain [g] 33.23±1.55 34.82±0.89
Data given are Mean ± SD, * - P < 0.05
Table 1: The body and vital organs weights.
The weight Cont HMB
Liver 1.98±2.08 3.27±4.8
Heart 0.72±0.65 0.71±4.84
Lungs 1.18±1.31 1.55±1.41
Spleen 0.08±0.10 0.08±0.18
Stomach 0.61±0.69 0.63±0.57
Kidneys 0.77±1.09 0.76±0.55
Brain 3.76±1.76 2.45±0.70
Data given are Mean ± SD
Table 2: The relative weights (%) of body and vital organs.
Citation: Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Hułas-Stasiak M, Tomczyk A (2015) Maternal Nutrition with Β-Hydroxy-Β-Methylbutyrate as Strong 
Determinants of the Development of Newborn Offspring in Pigs. J Neonatal Biol 4: 183. doi:10.4172/2167-0897.1000183
Pge 3 of 3
Volume 4 • Issue 3 • 1000183
J Neonatal Biol
ISSN: 2167-0897 JNB, an open access journal 
References
1. Gill JW, Hosking BJ, Egan AR (1998) Prenatal programing of mammalian 
growth - a review of the role of steroids: Liv Prod Sci 54: 251-267. 
2. Smith NH, Ozanne SE.(2006) Intrauterine origins of metabolic disease. Rev 
Gynaecol Perinat Practice 6: 211-217. 
3. Holemans K, Aertis L, Van Assche A (1998) Fetal growth and long-term 
consequences in animal models of growth retardation. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
81: 149-156. 
4. Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P (2011) Prenatal glucocorticoids can programm 
postnatal development. J Pre-Clin Clin Res 5: 7-11.
5. Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski  P, Puzio I, Prost L, Kurlak P, et al. (2014) 
Acrylamide-induced prenatal programming intestine structure in guinea pig. J
Physiol Pharmacol 65: 107-115.
6. Nissen S, Sharp R, Ray M, Rathmacher JA, Rice D (1996) Effect of leucine 
metabolite β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate on muscle metabolism during 
resistance-exercise training. J Appl Physiol 81: 2095-2104.
7. Nissen S, Abumrad NN (1997) Nutritional role of the leucine metabolite 
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB). J Nutr Biochem 8: 300-311.
8. Brown SA, Rogers LK, Dunn JK, Gotto Jr AM, PatschW (1990) Development 
of cholesterol hemostatic memory in the rats is influenced by maternal diets. 
Metabolism 39: 468-473.
9. Williams J, Abumrad N, Barbul A (2002) Effect of a specialized amino acid 
mixture on human collagen deposition. Ann Surg 236: 369–375.
10. Tako E, Ferket PR, Uni Z (2004) Effects of in ovo feeding of carbohydrates and 
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate on the development of chicken intestine. Poult Sci 
83: 2023–2028.
11. Tatara RM, Śliwa E, Krupski W (2007) Prenatal programming of skeletal 
development in the offspring: Effects of maternal treatment with β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate (HMB) on femur properties in pigs at slaughter age.  Bone 40: 
1615-1622.
12. Bassett DR, Howley ET (2000) Limiting factors for maximum oxygen uptake 
and determinants of endurance performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 32: 70-84.
13. Baudrand R, Campino C, Carvajal CA, Olivieri O, Guidi G,et al. (2011) 
Increased urinary glucocorticoid metabolites are associated with metabolic 
syndrome, hypoadiponectinemia, insulin resistance and β cell dysfunction.
Steroids 76: 1575-1581.
14. Baxter JH, Carlos JL, Thurmond J, Rehani RN, Bultman J, et al. (2005) Dietary 
toxicity of calcium beta-hydroxy-beta-methyl butyrate (CaHMB). Food Chem 
Toxicol, 43: 1731-1741.
15. Rodriguez NR, Di Marco NM, Langley S (2009) American Dietetic Association; 
Dietitians of Canada; American College of Sports Medicine: American College 
of Sports Medicine position stand. Nutrition and athletic performance. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 41: 709-731.
16. Calfee R, Fadale P (2006) Popular ergogenic drugs and supplements in young 
athletes. Pediatrics. 117: e577-e589.
17. Maughan RJ, Shirreffs SM (2012) Nutrition for sports performance: issues and 
opportunities. Proc Nutr Soc71: 112-119.
18. Holecek M, Muthny T, Kovarik M, Sispera L (2009) Effect of beta-hydroxy-beta-
methylbutyrate (HMB) on protein metabolism in whole body and in selected 
tissues. Food Chem Toxicol 47: 255–259.
19. Wilson JM, Grant SC, Lee SR, Masad I, Park YM (2012) Beta-hydroxy-beta-
methylbutyrate blunts negative age-related changes in body composition, 
functionality and myofiber dimensions in rats. J Int Soc. Sports Nutr 9: 1-11. 
20. Zanchi NE, Gerlinger-Romero F, Guimarães-Ferreira L, de Siqueira Filho MA, 
Felitti V, et al. (2011) HMB supplementation: clinical and athletic performance-
related effects and mechanisms of action. Amino Acids 40: 1015-1025.


=== PAGE 13 ===
RESEARCH ARTICLE
The effect of maternalHMB supplementation
on bone mechanicaland geometrical
properties,as well as histomorphometry and
immunolocalizationof VEGF, TIMP2, MMP13,
BMP2 in the bone and cartilagetissue of the
humerus of their newborn piglets
Agnieszka Tomczyk-Warunek1, Tomasz BlicharskiID
1*, Jaromir Jarecki1,
Piotr DobrowolskiID
2, Siemowit MuszyńskiID
3, Ewa Tomaszewska4, Lucio C. Rovati5
1 Chair and Department of Rehabilitation and Orthopaedics, Medical University in Lublin, Lublin, Poland,
2 Department of Functional Anatomy and Cytobiology Animal Physiology, Maria Curie-Skłodowska
University, Lublin, Poland, 3 Department of Biophysics, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Lublin, Poland,
4 Department of Animal Physiology, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Lublin, Poland, 5 School of
Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy
* blicharski@vp.pl
Abstract
The presented experiment focuses on assessing the impact of HMB (hydroxy-β-methobuty-
rate) supplementation of mothers during pregnancy on the development of the skeletal sys-
tem of their offspring. For this purpose, an experiment was carried out on 12 clinically
healthy sows of the Great White Poland breed, which were divided randomly into two groups
the control and the HMB group. All animals were kept under standard conditions and
received the same feed for pregnant females. In contrast, females from the HMB group
between 70 and 90 days were supplemented with 3-hydroxy-3-methylbutyle in the amount
of 0.2g/kg b.w/day. Immediately after birth, the piglets were also divided into groups based
on: sex, and presence or lack HMB supplementation, and subsequently were euthanized
and humerus bones from all piglets were collected. Mother’s HMB supplementation during
pregnancy affected the multiple index of their offspring. The higher humerus mass and
length was observed with the greater effect in males. Maternal supplementation also influ-
enced on the geometrical and mechanical properties of the humerus as in the case of mass,
this effect was higher in males. Also, the collagen structure of the compacted and trabecular
bone changed under the HMB addition. Maternal supplementation also affected the expres-
sion of selected proteins in growth cartilage and trabecular bone. The obtained results show
that the administration to the mother during pregnancy by the HMB significantly affects the
development of the humerus in many ways. The obtained results also confirm the utility of
such experiments in understanding of the importance of the pregnancy diet as an develop
and adaptable factor of offspring organisms and are the base for further research in that
area as well as in the protein markers expression area.
PLOS ONE
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 1 / 26
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
OPEN ACCESS
Citation:Tomczyk-WarunekA, BlicharskiT, Jarecki
J, Dobrowolski P, MuszyńskiS, Tomaszewska E, et
al. (2021)The effectof maternalHMB
supplementationon bone mechanicaland
geometricalproperties,as well as
histomorphometryand immunolocalizationof
VEGF,TIMP2,MMP13,BMP2 in the bone and
cartilagetissueof the humerusof theirnewborn
piglets.PLoS ONE 16(2):e0240642.https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642
Editor:XiaofangWang,TexasA&M University
Collegeof Dentistry,UNITEDSTATES
Received:September28, 2020
Accepted:February6, 2021
Published:February24, 2021
Peer ReviewHistory:PLOS recognizes the
benefits of transparency in the peer review
process; therefore, we enable the publication of
all of the content of peer review and author
responses alongside final, published articles. The
editorial history of this article is available here:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642
Copyright:© 2021 Tomczyk-Waruneket al. This is
an open accessarticledistributedunderthe terms
of the CreativeCommonsAttribution License,
whichpermitsunrestricteduse, distribution,and
reproductionin any medium,providedthe original
authorand sourceare credited.
Introduction
The growth and ossification of individual skeletal elements during prenatal development is dif-
ferent. Studies in animal models showed that the humerus growth and ossification begins
much faster than the other long bones, which means that it reaches its length faster [1]. Differ-
ences in the development of individual skeletal bones may contribute to the appearance of dif-
ferent adaptive changes during fetal development as a result of environmental changes [2].
Studies in animal models (including pigs whose genome is much more similar to the human
genome compared to other animal models) show that undernutrition of the mother during
pregnancy significantly affects the skeletal system of her offspring. The effect of maternal nutri-
tion during pregnancy on fetal development has also been confirmed in human studies [2].
The pigs compared to other animal models (mice, rats) are characterized by a very similar size
and physiology of internal organs to humans, therefore it is a very good model in preclinical
studies and in nutritional experiments [3].
Changes in the skeletal system during prenatal development may in later life contribute to
the earlier appearance of osteopenia, as a consequence, osteoporosis [4–7]. As a result of osteo-
porotic changes, fractures occur not only in the proximal femur, but also in the proximal
humerus or distal radius [8].
One of the nutritional factors studied is the supplementation of hydroxy-β-methobutyrate
(HMB), which occurs naturally in the body. It is mainly responsible for the proper functioning
of the cell membrane, and also participates in de novo cholesterol synthesis [9]. It is formed as
a result of the degradation of the branched-chain amino acid leucine in the body. Only 5% of
the leucine is used for the production of hydroxy-β-methobutyrate [10, 11]. In human nutri-
tion, HMB is used as a supplement for athletes, which is associated with a reduction of the
body fat, and an increase in the physical strength of the muscle tissue. This agent has also an
anti-catabolic activity, inhibiting protein degradation and protecting muscles against damage
[9, 12]. This proves that HMB supplementation can be used as a therapeutic agent in the treat-
ment of elderly sarcopenia. This supplement is also used during the convalescence period [13].
It is not recommended during pregnancy. However, there is no information about any nega-
tive effects of using this supplement on fetal development during this period. That is why this
supplement has become an area of research interest in recent years. There are few experimen-
tal studies using animal models explaining the effect of the HMB supplementation in the pre-
natal period. However, in the last few years some have been related to the influence of this
supplement on the skeletal system [14–20]. In the literature the information on the impact of
this supplement on the femoral bone of newborn organisms whose mothers had the HMB
supplementation during pregnancy [16, 17]. In these studies, the sows were supplemented
between days 70 and 90 of pregnancy, and HMB was administered at a daily dose of 0.2 g/kg
of body weight. However, there is no information on the impact of HMB maternal supplemen-
tation on the development of the humerus of their newborn offspring. Other ontogenetic
development as well as different functions of the humerus may indicate that, in addition to the
femur, it may be a model bone for studying skeletal system [1, 5, 21]. The humerus is also an
object of interest for researchers, because in adulthood fractures of the proximal humerus
occur more frequently than fractures of the proximal femur [22].
An indicator of changes in the skeletal system of offspring of mothers supplemented with
HMB may not only be the basic bone properties such as: length, mass, mechanical, geometric
properties, histomorphometry of bone and cartilage tissue. Also protein expression and immu-
nolocalization in bone and cartilage can be used as an indicator [17]. For this purpose: VEGF
(Vascular endothelial growth factor), TIMP2 (Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases), MMP13
(Matrix metalloproteinase 13), BMP2 (Bone morphogenetic protein 2) expressions can be
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 2 / 26
Data Availability Statement:All relevantdata are
withinthe manuscript.
Funding:The authorsreceivedno specificfunding
for this work.
Competinginterests: NO authorshave competing
interests.

=== PAGE 14 ===
determined. VEGF is a signal protein that stimulates cell function and is responsible for the
formation of blood vessels. As is known, adequate blood supply to bone promotes metabolism
[23]. BMP2 stimulates the development of bone and cartilage tissue by influencing the forma-
tion of type II collagen fibers [24, 25]. MMP13 or collagenase-3 is responsible for the resorp-
tion of bone and cartilage, by degradation of collagen fibers mainly type II but also type I
found in the matrix of these tissues. It shows strong expression in the course of embryonic
development and can influence the process of modeling these tissues. TIMP2 is an MMP13
antagonist. The available literature also reports that BMP 2 also inhibits the action of MMP13
[26]. The interaction between of the above proteins determines the proper development of the
bone [27].
To our knowledge, there are also no studies that show the effect of maternal HMB supple-
mentation on the immunolocalization of VEGF, BMP2, TIMP2, MMP13 which significantly
affect the osteolytic and osteogenic processes in the bone and growth plate cartilage in the off-
spring. There is also no information whether maternal supplementation influences the prena-
tal development of the humerus, although the literature reports that it affects the growing of
the femur. As it known that these two bones are characterized by different ontogenetic devel-
opment, in order to complete the knowledge the aim of the study was to examine the effect of
HMB supplementation on femora development in the pig model offspring.
Material and methods
Experimental model
The study was conducted in accordance with the requirements for the use of laboratory ani-
mals, which were included in the regulation of the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Develop-
ment and the Minister of Science and Higher Education. The experiment was accepted by the
Local Ethical Committee of Animals at the University of Life Sciences in Lublin (Resolution
No. 30/2013 of 16/04/2013). All stages of the experiment were carried out in accordance with
its requirements. While conducting the experiment, every effort was made to minimize the
suffering and stress of animals.
The experiment was conducted on 24 newborn piglets “before first colostrum uptake” born
by 12 sows of Large White Polish All experimental animals were clinically healthy and bred to
the same boar. Primiparous sows were used in the study to avoid the impact of the number of
pregnancies on birth weight in the offspring. The females used in this experiment were of simi-
lar age—10 mouths and weight—between 100 to 120 kg. Animals were kept in separated cages,
with the temperature and the humidity control on a 12-hour daily cycle. The females were had
free access to fresh water. The pregnant sows were fed twice a day (2,3kg), with balanced stan-
dard compound feed for pregnant and lactating sows [16]. The pregnant females randomly
divided in to two groups: control (n = 6) and experimental (HMB, n = 6). The experimental
group was supplemented, with HMB of the dose 0.2g HMB/kg of the body weight/day between
70 and 90 days of the pregnancy during morning fed. For supplementation was used HMB in
the form of calcium salts, while pregnant sows from control groups were supplementation
with placebo—CaCO3 at the same dose. This HMB dose was selected based on previous studies
that used the same dose of hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate and had a significant effect on offspring
development [16, 17, 28]. In this study we decided to supplement sows between 70 to 90 days
of pregnancy, because this is critical moment to prenatal development in piglets [29]. During
the experiment, no painkillers were used because the experiment was based on supplementa-
tion of pregnant mothers by adding HMB or a placebo to wholesome feed.
All piglets born by physiological partum. No difference in body weight of newborn piglets
was observed (Grubbs statistic), therefore 6 individuals from each sex were randomly selected
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 3 / 26
from both groups (one female and one male from one mother). Next newborn piglets were
subjected to euthanasia using lethal doses of 0,6 ml/kg of body weight, pentobarbitalum natri-
cum (Morbital, Biowet, Puławy, Poland). Before euthanasia, piglets were premedicated with
xylazine at a dose of 1.0 ml / kg of body weight (Sedazin, Biowet, Puławy, Poland). Both
humerus were isolated and cleaned of soft tissue. Bones were weighed and measured, an then
frozen of -25˚C for s for storage until further analysis. The right humerus were intended for
geometric measurements and tissue density analyzes. The humerus taken from left side of the
body were intended for mechanical analyzes and histological examination.
Bone mechanical properties
Before proceeding to the test, all bones of the humerus were thawed at the room temperature.
The mechanical properties were examined using a three-point bending test. The test was car-
ried out using a Zwick Z010 testing machine (Zwick GmbH & Company KG, Ulm, Germany),
with at constant load [30]. The bones were placed on supports. The distance between supports
was 40% of the total bone length. On the basis of the recorded force-deflection curves, the
maximum elastic strength and the ultimate strength were determined [17, 30].
Tissue density of the bone and the cartilage
The study was carried out in the proximal humerus for both bone and cartilage. Prior to the
measurement, the test material was dried at 105˚C to remove water. The study was carried out
with a Micrometrics AccuPyc 1330 helium pycnometer (Micromeritics, Inc., Norcross, GA)
The results of BTD were expressed in g/cm3 [30].
Bone geometric properties
Right humerus were cut across in the middle of the shaft using a diamond bandsaw 140 (MBS
240/E, Proxxon GmbH, Foehren, Germany). Then the diameters: external horizontal (H) and
internal (h), vertical external (B) and internal (b) were measured with a digital caliper. Based
on which were calculated: the cortical cross-sectional area (A), the mean relative wall thickness
(MRWT) and the cortical index (Cl) were calculated. In addition, a secondary moment of the
inertia (Ix) was calculated [30]. The study of geometric features describes the following
formulas:
• A—cross-sectional area:
A¼ p
4 H� G  h� bð Þ
• MRWT—mean relative wall thickness:
MRWT¼½ B  b
B
  �
þ H  h
H
  �
�
2
• Cl—cortical index:
Cl¼½ B  b
b
  �
þ H  h
h
  �
�
2 � 100%
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 4 / 26

=== PAGE 15 ===
• Ix—second moment of inertia about horizontal axis:
l ¼ p
64 H� B3  h� b3ð Þ
Bone histology
After mechanical properties measurements the proximal end of right humerus was cut. The
obtained material was initially fixed in a 4% buffered formalin solution. Then material was
decalcified using a buffered 10% EDTA solution. Next, the material was dehydrated in increas-
ing gradient of the EtOH. The bone fragments were prepared for standard histological and
microscopic procedure. The material was cut into 4 μm thick sections using the HM360
microtome (Microm, Wolldar, Germany) [31, 32]. For the trabecular bone, the growth plate
and the joint cartilage, the Goldner’s trichrome staining was performed [33].
PSR (Picrosirus red) staining was performed to analyze the proportion of the mature and
immature collagen fibers in the trabecular bone and the cortical bone [18, 34]. Stained sections
were analyzed using microscope (Olympus BX63; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) under normal
(Goldner) and polarized light (PSR).
Histological analysis of the trabecular bone, the growth plate, the articular
cartilage and the collagen structure
In the growth plate cartilage the thickness of four zones and total thickness was measured. The
first (I) resting zone has a large amount of matrix that separates the individual chondrocytes or
isogenic groups. In the second (II) proliferating zone, chondrocytes form columns, their
shapes flatten, and they are subject to intense division. In the third (III) hypertrophic zone,
cartilage cells increase their volume, lose nuclei, and create regular columns. In the fourth (IV)
calcium zone, cartilage cells undergo apoptosis. This is the place where the cartilage goes into
the bone [31, 33].
In the articular cartilage, the thickness of three zones and the total thickness were measured.
In the first (I) superficial zone, the cartilage cells are small, flattened, and parallel to the surface
of the cartilage. The second (II) transition zone has a large number of matrices in which chon-
drocytes are larger, have a round shape, and are arranged alone or form isogenic groups. In
the third (III) deep zone, the number of chondrocytes increases, and they regularly form col-
umns [35, 36]. Obtained images were analyzed using the Olympus cell-Sens Version 1.5 graph-
ics analysis software (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
The bone volume (BV) and the bone tissue (TV) based on the number of pixels for the
epiphysis and the metaphysis were determined. On the basis of the above-mentioned parame-
ters, the ratio of the bone volume to the bone tissue (BV/TV), which was expressed as a per-
centage, was determined. In the trabecular bone, the number of trabeculae (Tb. N), the
thickness of individual trabeculae (Tb.Th), the distance between individual trabecular (Tb.Sp)
were determined [35, 36]. The microscope pictures were analysis using the ImageJ software
(Wayne Rasband, National Institute of Mental Health, 165 Bethesda, MD, USA). This program
was also used for the analysis of the collagen structure.
Immunohistochemical analysis
For immunohistochemical analysis, deparaffinization and hydration of sections of bone and
cartilage tissue were assigned. The next step was to recover the antigenicity of the tested mate-
rial by enzymatic reactions, by using the proteinase K (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA).
This step lasted 10 min and was carried out at 37˚C. Then, the a 3% hydrogen peroxide
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 5 / 26
solution was used to block the peroxidase activity. The incubation was carried out at the room
temperature for 5 min. When this process was completed, the normal serum was applied to
slides to block all non-specific reactions. This process lasted 30 min and was carried out at
37˚C. The next step was the application of the primary antibody: MMP13 (Abcam, Cambridge,
UK, concentration 10–20μg/ml), TIMP2 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK, dilution 1:100), VEGF
(Biorbyt, Wuhan, Chine, concentration 0,5mg/ml) and BMP2 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK, dilu-
tion 1:250). Incubation lasted all night at 4˚C. The next day, a secondary antibody: the biotiny-
lated anti-rabbit immunoglobulin (nr. ab6730, Abcam, Cambridge, UK, dilution 1:200) was
applied and incubated for 30 min at 37˚C. For negative control for each antibody the same
procedure was carried out, but without the first antibody. Next DAB (3,3’-diaminobenzidine
tetrahydrochloride DAB, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was applied and incubated for
15 min at the room temperature. For contras staining was used haematoxylin (Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO, USA) [17].
Microscopic observations allowed to evaluate immunolocalization of MMP13, TIMP2,
VEGF, BMP2 in tubercular bone and growth place cartilage, as negative control (nuclei are
blue) or positive control (nuclei are brown). The brown color indicates the presence of pro-
teins [16, 17].
To evaluate the expression of the tested proteins for both the bone trabecula and the growth
plate cartilage, ten fields of observation were selected in which all cells as well as cells with a
positive response were counted. Then, the proportion of cells with a positive immunohisto-
chemical reaction for MMP13, TIMP2, VEGF, BMP2 was calculated. The results were
expressed as a percentage [37].
The intensity of protein expression in the matrix of the growth plate cartilage and bone tra-
beculae was determined on the basis of gray analysis, which is based on the brightness of pixels.
For this purpose, microscopic phots were converted to 8-bit grayscale. The higher the pixel
value, the weaker the expression of the tested protein. The analysis was performed using the
ImageJ software [38].
Statistical analysis
The statistical analysis of the obtained results was carried out using the software Statistica 13.1
(TIBCO Software Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA). All results are presented as mean values with stan-
dard deviations (mean ± S.D.). Differences between the results were tested using a two-way
ANOVA analysis of variance (sex, supplementation) and Tukey’s post-hoc test. The normal
distribution of data was checked using the Shapiro-Wilk W test, while the homogeneity of var-
iance was tested using the Levene’s test. Statistically significant differences were assumed for P
<0.05.
Results
Bone basis and geometrical properties
In offspring whose mothers received HMB during pregnancy, the bone weight was signifi-
cantly higher compared to the control. This effect was observed in both sexes. In males, the use
of HMB in their mothers also caused significant increased the length of the humerus. Also, for
males there was a significant increase in the vertical and horizontal external diameter, the
cross sectional area, the mean wall thickness and the cortical index in comparison to the con-
trol group. These effects were not observed in females whose pregnant mothers were supple-
mented with HMB. In both sexes of the experimental groups a significant increase in the
moment of inertia was observed (Table 1).
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 6 / 26

=== PAGE 16 ===
Bone mechanical properties
The use of the HMB in the maternal nutrition contributed to a significant increase in ultimate
strength and maximal elastic strength in their offspring compared to newborns in the control
group. This effect was observed in both sexes (Table 2).
Histomorphometry of the proximal humerus epiphysis, metahpysis and
BTD
Histomorphometric analysis of the epiphysis revealed a significantly higher number of trabec-
ulae in females compared to males. Also these differences were observed after HMB treatment.
In the case of the relative bone volumes as well as the trabecular space, histomorphometric
analysis revealed a significantly lower value of these parameters in females as compared to
males. However, in the case of BV/TV in females, supplementation of their mothers during
pregnancy contributed to the increase of this parameter. This effect was not observed in males.
The size of the trabecular space did not change under the influence of HMB treatment. The
trabecular thickness was significantly higher in the males control group compared to males
from the experimental group. This effect was not observed in females. Sex also did not affect
this parameter (Table 3).
The males from the control group were characterized by higher the BTD than females from
the same group. In males there was a significant decrease in the BTD from the HMB group
compared to the control group, this effect was not observed in females (Table 3).
Table 1. The effect of maternal treatment with HMB on the humerus osteometric and geometrical properties in newborn piglets.
Osteometric properties Geometrical properties
Weight, g Lenght, mm B, mm b, mm H, mm h, mm A, mm2 MRWT, — CI, % Ix, mm4
Main effect supplementation
Control 5.09 46.34 6.16 2.77 4.77 1.94 19.01 1.36 57.23 55.15
HMB 8.50 55.00 7.09 2.70 5.49 2.22 25.99 1.63 60.74 90.97
Main effect sex
Male 7.15 49.62 6.60 2.63 5.10 2.09 22.41 1.51 59.43 71.05
Female 6.44 51.72 6.65 2.85 5.16 2.07 22.59 1.48 58.53 75.07
Treatment effect
Control male 5.03a ±
0.469
43.79b ±
5.34
5.93a ±
0.623
2.68a ±
0.387
4.68a ±
0.319
2.04a ±
0.298
17.76a ±
2.67
1.28a ± 0.231 55.97a ±
4.17
49.19a ±
11.12
HMB male 9.26b ±
0.943
55.46a ± 5.87 7.21c ±
0.394
2.58a ±
0.412
5.53c ±
0.201
2.13a ±
0.321
27.05c ±
2.39
1.74c ± 0.189 62.89b ±
2.68
92.91b ±
10.91
Control female 5.14a ±
0.598
48.90ab ±
6.79
6.34ab ±
0.549
2.87a ±
0.189
4.86ab ±
0.534
1.83a ±
0.289
20.26ab ±
3.91
1.45ab ±
0.197
58.97a ±
3.78
61.10a ±
14.01
HMB female 7.74b ±
0.991
54.56a ± 5.79 6.96bc ±
0.578
2.83a ±
0.361
5.46bc ±
0.413
2.32a ±
0.496
24.92bc ±
3.43
1.52bc ±
0.159
58.58a ±
4.02
89.03b ±
9.88
Pooled SEM 0.53 1.67 0.20 0.17 0.15 0.14 1.2 0.06 0.87 6.27
Main effect and interaction
Supplementation <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 0.701 <0.001 0.066 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001
Sex 0.261 0.234 0.793 0.220 0.728 0.938 0.885 0.688 0.322 0.566
Supplementation x
sex
0.195 0.093 0.147 0.851 0.432 0.198 0.076 0.004 0.010 0.264
a, b, c—mean values in rows with different letters differ significantly at P<0.05; SEM—standard error of the means.
H—horizontal external diameter; h—horizontal internal diameter; B—vertical external diameter; b—vertical internal diameter; A—cortical cross-sectional area; MRWT
—the mean relative wall thickness; Cl—the cortical index; Ix—secondary moment of inertia.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.t001
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 7 / 26
Table 2. The effect of maternal treatment with HMB on mechanical properties in newborn piglets.
Ultimate strength, N Max. elastic strength, N
Main effect supplementation
Control 189.17 89.58
HMB 299.42 178.33
Main effect sex
Male 226.33 138.33
Female 262.25 129.58
Treatment effect
Control male 167.33a ± 32.03 88.33a ± 10.61
HMB male 285.33bc ± 49.94 188.33b ± 18.91
Control female 211.00ab ± 45.33 90.83a ± 17.17
HMB female 313.50c ± 32.25 168.33b ± 19.24
Pooled SEM 18.92 11.49
Main effects and interaction
Supplementation <0.001 <0.001
Sex 0.079 0.515
Supplementation x sex 0.694 0.404
a, b, c—mean values in rows with different letters differ significantly at P<0.05; SEM—standard error of the means.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.t002
Table 3. The effect of maternal treatment with HMB on humerus epiphysis and metaphysis histomorphology in newborn piglets.
Epiphysis Metaphysis
Tb. N/mm of
bone
BV/TV, % Tb.Th mean,
μm
Tb.Sp mean,
μm
BTD, g/
cm3
Tb. N/mm of
bone
BV/TV, % Tb.Th mean,
μm
Tb.Sp mean,
μm
Main effect supplementation
Control 8.29 12.48 26.53 123.68 2.48 4.69 11.53 22.83 261.04
HMB 8.58 21.84 25.40 119.38 2.22 4.65 10.64 21.89 285.35
Main effect sex
Male 7.05 15.73 25.99 142.86 2.42 4.22 9.36 21.90 292.21
Female 9.82 15.60 25.91 100.21 2.29 5.13 12.81 22.82 254.18
Treatment effect
Control male 6.85a ± 1.03 19.10a ±
3.00
27.15b ± 2.48 143.46b ±
19.62
2.61b ±
0.232
3.79a ± 0.931 8.42a ± 2.50 22.04a ± 2.74 303.79a ±
91.01
HMB male 7.25a ± 1.23 18.01a ±
3.01
24.83a ± 1.65 142.27b ±
24.04
2.23a ±
0.071
4.64ab ± 1.01 10.30ab ±
3.99
21.76a ± 2.91 218.28a ±
91.04
Control female 9.72b ± 1.22 15.77b ±
2.01
25.91ab ± 3.18 103.92a ±
15.67
2.36a ±
0.113
5.59b ± 0.892 14.64b ±
2.99
23.63a ± 2.99 280.62a ±
63.09
HMB female 9.91b ± 0.741 25.68c ±
1.99
25.90ab ± 1.89 96.51a ± 11.24 2.22a ±
0.067
4.66ab ± 1.25 10.99ab ±
3.67
22.01a ± 3.22 290.07a ±
78.01
Pooled SEM 1.23 3.01 1.98 27.85 0.12 1.72 4.67 3.55 125.51
Main effects and interaction
Supplementation 0.366 <0.001 0.029 0.571 <0.001 0.930 0.471 0.317 0.454
Sex <0.001 <0.001 0.876 <0.001 0.032 0.048 0.006 0.332 0.243
Supplementation x
sex
0.450 <0.001 0.331 0.682 0.038 0.053 0.027 0.481 0.146
a, b, c—mean values in rows with different letters differ significantly at P<0.05; SEM—standard error of the means.
BV/TV—relative bone volume; Tb.Th—trabecular thickness; Tb.Sp—trabecular separation; Tb.N—trabecular number; BTD—bone tissue density.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.t003
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 8 / 26

=== PAGE 17 ===
Histomorphometric analysis showed that HMB did not affect histomorphometry of the
bones in the metaphysis. However, it was observed that females in the control group were
characterized by the significantly larger number and volume of trabeculae compared to males
in the control group (Table 3).
Distribution of immature and mature collagen fibers
In the cortical bone the HMB supplementation of mothers during pregnancy significantly
increased the share immature collagen fibers in females. In contrast, in males, maternal supple-
mentation contributed to a decrease in mature collagen fibers. Also, a significant decrease in
the ratio of mature to immature fiber collagen was also observed in males (Table 4, Fig 1).
In the epiphysis of the humerus in males from the HMB group, a significant decrease in the
share of immature and mature collagen fibers as well as a decrease in their ratio was observed.
An increase in the share of immature collagen fibers and a decrease in the ratio of mature to
immature collagen in females from the HMB group was observed (Table 4, Fig 1).
In the methaphysis in females from the HMB group compared to the control group, an
increase in the share of immature collagen fibers and the mature collagen fibers was noted. In
males, supplementation with their mothers contributed to a reduction in the content of imma-
ture collagen fibers and an increase in the ratio of mature to immature collagen (Table 4,
Fig 1).
Table 4. The effect of maternal treatment with HMB on humerus collagen structure cortical and tubercular bone in newborn piglets.
Tubercular bone Cortical bone
Epiphysis Metaphysis
Immature
collagen
fibers, %
Mature
collagen
fibers, %
The ration of
mature to
immature
collagen, —
Immature
collagen
fibers, %
Mature
collagen
fibers, %
The ration of
mature to
immature
collagen, —
Immature
collagen
fibers, %
Mature
collagen
fibers, %
The ration of
mature to
immature
collagen, —
Main effect supplementation
Control 2.25 20.16 8.59 1.29 5.68 4.37 2.56 31.14 11.74
HMB 2.22 17.53 6.03 0.76 5.80 4.03 3.37 27.52 8.74
Main effect sex
Male 2.11 18.19 7.53 1.15 7.29 14.79 2.75 25.11 9.24
Female 2.26 19.50 7.09 1.27 7.61 6.45 3.29 33.56 11.17
Treatment effect
Control male 2.50bc ± 0.612 22.03a ±
5.77
8.88b ± 2.56 2.04d ± 0.443 7.26ab ±
1.51
4.36a ± 2.53 2.41a ± 0.521 29.52a ±
4.78
11.22a ± 2.11
HMB male 1.72a ± 0.821 14.35b ±
4.33
6.18a ± 2.60 0.26a ± 0.012 7.32ab ±
0.991
25.22b ± 3.77 2.09ab ± 0.632 20.70b ±
4.82
7.26b ± 3.07
Control female 1.99ab ± 0.608 18.28ab ±
5.03
8.30b ± 2.06 1.01b ± 0.290 6.35a ± 1.21 6.74a ± 2.56 2.72a ± 0.910 32.77a ±
4.02
12.14a ± 3.21
HMB female 2.73c ± 0.709 20.72a ±
3.89
5.87a ± 2.71 1.52c ± 0.210 8.87b ± 1.01 6.17a ± 2.31 3.86b ± 1.81 34.35a ±
4.88
10.21ab ± 2.66
Pooled SEM 0.871 6.67 2.98 0.820 1.32 1.13 1.65 8.54 3.98
Main effects and interaction
Supplementation 0.864 0.019 <0.0001 <0.0001 0.055 <0.0001 <0.001 0.023 <0.001
Sex 0.080 0.239 0.439 0.818 0.635 <0.0001 0.039 <0.000 0.024
Supplementation
x sex
<0.0001 <0.0001 0.812 <0.0001 0.066 <0.0001 0.382 <0.001 0.235
a, b, c—mean values in rows with different letters differ significantly at P<0.05; SEM—standard error of the means.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.t004
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 9 / 26
Fig 1. Representative images of PSR (Picrosirus red) staining carried out on formaldehyde-fixed fragments sections
of the trabecular bone of the humerus metaphysis, epiphysis and the cortical bone of newborn piglets. Mature
collagen fibers are red or orange, while immature collagen fibers are green.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.g001
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 10 / 26

=== PAGE 18 ===
Histomorphometry of the growth plate cartilage
Histomorphometric analysis of growth plate cartilage revealed significantly higher thick-
ness the zone I in male compare to females. The HMB supplementation of females contrib-
uted to an increase in the thickness the zone I in comparison to the control group.
However, we see the reverse effect in males. In both sexes, the administration of the HMB
to the mother during pregnancy led to an increase thickness the zone II, with no differences
between the sexes. Although in the control groups males had significantly thicker zone II.
The zone III is thicker with both sexes coming from experimental groups. Histomorpho-
metric analysis revealed significantly higher thickness the zone IV in males compared to
females and no effect of HMB treatment. There was no significant statistical difference in
the total thickness of the growth cartilage between the males in the group, whose mothers
were supplemented with the HMB and the thick control. However, a significant increase in
this parameter was observed in females from the experimental group compared to the con-
trol group (Table 5).
Histomorphometry of the articular cartilage and BTD
In both females and males of mothers who were the HMB supplemented during pregnancy,
the thickness of the I zone of the articular cartilage was increased. This effect can also be
observed in males in the II zone of this cartilage, while in females the administration of the
HMB reduced the thickness of this zone. The administration of the HMB to the mother during
pregnancy contributed to the increase in the thickness of the III zone in males, while no effect
was seen in females. The total thickness of the articular cartilage was significantly higher in
both sexes of animals from the experimental group as compared to the control group. The
effect of the HMB administration during pregnancy was higher in males than in females. Only
in the case of the thickness zone I this effect was higher in females. The BTD reduced in the
Table 5. The effect of maternal treatment with HMB on humerus growth plate cartilage histomorphology in newborn piglets.
Zone I Zone II Zone III Zone IV Total thickness
Main effect supplementation
Control 208.14 191.08 153.13 191.66 879.15
HMB 208.18 238.56 203.17 185.84 918.18
Main effect sex
Male 191.55 223.16 175.82 208.07 918.41
Female 225.90 206.48 180.49 169.43 878.91
Treatment effect
Control male 218.49c ± 28.01 200.18c ± 24.08 153.31a ± 24.78 207.95b ± 27.15 942.78a ± 69.17
HMB male 164.61a ± 22.83 246.78a ± 27.01 200.32b ± 28.59 208.16b ± 27.31 894.05a ± 90.47
Control female 199.87b ± 21.91 181.97b ± 19.81 152.96a ± 27.18 175.37a ± 28.78 815.52b ± 72.04
HMB female 251.67d ± 29.24 230.34a ± 32.24 208.02b ± 20.11 163.49a ± 20.74 942.30a ± 103.59
Pooled SEM 4.38 7.14 5.15 8.09 27.32
Main effects and interaction
Supplementation 0.008 <0.001 <0.001 0.480 <0.005
Sex <0.001 <0.001 0.384 <0.001 0.114
Supplementation x sex <0.001 0.852 0.349 0.462 0.211
a, b, c, d—mean values in rows with different letters differ significantly at P<0.05; SEM—standard error of the means.
Zone I—resting zone; Zone II—proliferating zone; Zone III—hypertrophic zone; Zone IV—calcium zone.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.t005
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 11 / 26
HMB males, whereas in females the differences were not observed. Sex did not affected the
HMB for this parameter (Table 6).
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) immunolocalization in the
bone trabecula and the growth plate cartilage
VEGF staining showed a weak response in the bone trabecular matrix and the cytoplasm of
cells in both study groups, regardless of gender, compared to the negative control. Statistical
analysis in the case of a positive response to the presence of VEGF in the cytoplasm of cells,
showed that males from the control group had a greater response compared to males from the
HMB group. On the other hand, in females, an inverse relationship was observed (Table 7.
Fig 2).
Analysis of the expression of this protein in the bone trabecular matrix based on the gray
analysis showed that males from the HMB group were characterized by a smaller response
compared to the other groups (Table 8, Fig 2).
In the case of growth plate cartilage, a response in the matrix in both test groups irrespective
of sex compared to the negative control was observed. Statistical analysis showed that, regard-
less of the group, females had a higher proportion of cartilage cells with a positive reaction. In
this sex as well, microscopic observation showed a strong staining of the cartilage cells in zones
II and III compared to males (many brown-stained nuclei and cells). Supplementation did not
significantly affect the percentage of cells with a positive response to the presence of VEGF in
their cytoplasm. In control females, strong VEGF staining was also observed in the cell nuclei
in the proliferative zone (Table 7, Figs 3 and 4).
In the cartilage tissue matrix, the strongest reaction was observed in zone IV in all groups,
especially at the border of this zone with zone III. Gray-scale analysis of the expression of this
protein at the border of these zones showed that females from the HMB group had the stron-
gest VEGF expression compared to the other groups (Table 8, Figs 3 and 4).
Table 6. The effect of maternal treatment with HMB on humeral articular cartilage histomorphology and BTD in newborn piglets.
Zone I Zone II Zone III Total thickness BTD
Main effect supplementation
Control 13.95 565.96 332.78 1082.41 2.21
HMB 17.88 542.65 421.67 1190.97 1.97
Main effect sex
Male 13.97 536.71 382.03 1178.54 1.92
Female 17.87 571.90 372.41 1094.84 2.01
Treatment effect
Control male 11.60b ± 4.83 504.68a ± 52.03 300.98b ± 46.70 1128.50a ± 99.01 2.25b ± 0.297
HMB male 16.31a ± 2.28 568.73b ± 51.22 463.08c ± 58.62 1228.57c ± 98.72 1.78a ± 0.104
Control female 16.42a ± 2.17 627.24c ± 60.81 364.57a ± 49.86 1036.31b ± 76.42 2.01ab ± 0.127
HMB female 19.42b ± 3.14 516.57a ± 50.72 380.25a ± 54.70 1153.37a ± 63.22 1.83a ± 0.164
Pooled SEM 0.65 13.53 8.83 16.92 0.07
Main effects and interaction
Supplementation <0.001 0.094 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001
Sex <0.001 0.012 0.286 <0.001 0.260
Supplementation x sex 0.208 <0.001 0.081 0.679 0.063
a, b, c—mean values in rows with different letters differ significantly at P<0.05; SEM—standard error of the means.
Zone I—superficial; Zone II—transition zone; Zone III—deep zone. BTD—bone tissue density.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.t006
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 12 / 26

=== PAGE 19 ===
Matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13) immunolocalization in the bone
trabecula and the growth plate cartilage
The MMP13 staining showed a response in the matrix of trabecular bone in all individuals.
Also, in the trabecular bone, the presence of MMP13 in the cell cytoplasm in all groups was
observed. In the case of females from the HMB group, statistical analysis showed a significant
increase in the proportion of cells with a positive response to the presence of MMP13. Micro-
scopic observation showed that in the HMB group, expression in cells was similar in both
sexes. Whereas in the control group, stronger reactions in males was observed. In males, sup-
plementation did not affect the expression of MMP13 in the cytoplasm of cells. However, in
females from the HMB group this reaction was stronger than in comparison with females
from the control group (Table 7, Fig 2).
Analysis of MMP13 expression in the matrix of trabecular showed a stronger response to
the presence of MMP13 in males from HMB group (Table 8).
In the case of growth plate cartilage, a response in the matrix in both test groups irrespective
of sex compared to the negative control was observed. Analysis of the proportion of cells with
a positive response to the presence of MMP13 cells in the cytoplasm showed that, compared to
the control group, males HMB had a stronger response. The same analysis showed that regard-
less of supplementation, female higher cells responded positively. There was no difference
between the females from the control group and the females from the HMB group in this anal-
ysis (Table 7). Microscopic observation showed that all groups showed reactions in the cyto-
plasm of cartilage cells in zones II and III (brown color of the cytoplasm), while there was no
reaction in the cell nucleus (blue nucleus) (Figs 3 and 4). In both sexes, supplementation
Table 7. The effect of maternal treatment with HMB on humerus growth plate cartilage and trabecular bone cells with a positive immunohistochemical reaction
for MMP13, TIMP2, VEGF, BMP2 in newborn piglets.
Growth plate cartilage Trabecular bone
MMP13, % TIMP2, % VEGF, % BMP2, % MMP13, % TIMP2, % VEGF, % BMP2, %
Main effect supplementation
Control 42.48 73.89 73.30 69.38 90.94 92.89 73.45 90.76
HMB 59.48 85.40 72.48 89.34 97.06 94.33 69.90 87.76
Main effect sex
Male 38.71 90.60 62.94 88.56 99.98 96.89 73.53 91.37
Female 63.25 68.69 82.83 70.16 87.99 90.39 69.81 86.88
Treatment effect
Control male 21.13b ± 4.13 94.98d ± 5.03 61.49a ± 5.77 81.97a ± 4.76 91.81a ± 9.12 99.00a ± 2.24 87.00b ± 8.37 93.73a ± 5.78
HMB male 56.28c ± 7.01 86.22c ± 6.76 64.40a ± 9.82 95.15c ± 3.87 98.91a ± 3.39 94.78a ± 5.29 60.07a ± 6.55 89.00a ± 6.27
Control female 62.68a ± 6.40 75.81b ± 8.01 82.19b ± 6.12 56.79b ± 7.11 81.87b ± 6.27 89.78a ± 6.27 59.89a ± 2.25 85.98a ± 3.09
HMB female 63.83a ± 8.56 61.56a ± 7.96 83.47b ± 9.05 83.53a ± 9.79 94.17a ± 5.39 91.99a ± 5.94 79.72b ± 3.60 87.79a ± 3.69
Pooled SEM 3.91 4.17 1.43 1.72 1.30 1.96 2.10 2.75
Main effects and interaction
Supplementation <0.001 <0.001 0.053 <0.001 0.521 0.552 0.090 0.556
Sex <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 0.011 0.090 0.135 0.956
Supplementation x sex <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 0.522 0.579 0.665 0.020
a, b, c, d- mean values in rows with different letters differ significantly at P<0.05; SEM—standard error of the means.
MMP13—matrix metalloproteinase 13; TIMP2—tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases; BMP2—bone morphogenetic protein 2; VEGF—vascular endothelial growth
factor.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.t007
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 13 / 26
Fig 2. Imunstohistimechmic analysis of the expression the MMP13 (matrix metalloproteinase 13), the TIMP2 (tissue inhibitor
of metalloproteinases 2), the VEFG (vascular endothelial growth factor) and the BMP2 (bone morphogenetic protein 2) from
the humerus trabeculae. Representative images immunohistochemical analysis carried out on the formaldehyde-fixed from the
humerus growth cartilage of newborn piglets. The positive reaction (presence of MMP13, TIMP2, VEFG, BMP2) in the cytoplasm
or the cell nucleus was marked in red, while the lack of expression was marked in blue.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.g002
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 14 / 26

=== PAGE 20 ===
resulted in a stronger expression of this protein in the cytoplasm of cartilage cells (Table 7, Figs
3 and 4).
In the growth plate cartilage matrix the strongest reactions on the border of zones III and
IV and in zone IV in all groups were observed. Gray analysis showed the strongest expression
of this white in male HMB (Table 8, Figs 3 and 4).
Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 2 (TIMP2) immunolocalization in
the bone trabecula and the growth plate cartilage
The TIMP2 staining showed a response in matrix and bone trabecular cells of all test groups
regardless of gender and supplementation, relative to the negative control. The analysis of the
participation of cells with a positive reaction to the presence of TIMP2 in the cytoplasm of
these cells showed that in the case of males, the control group was characterized by a higher
percentage of these cells compared to the HMB group (Table 7, Fig 2).
The analysis of TIMP expression in the trabecular matrix showed a decrease in TIMP
expression in males from the HMB group compared to the other groups (Table 8, Fig 2).
In the case of growth plate cartilage, a response in the matrix and cell in all studied groups
was observed. The analysis of the proportion of cells with a positive response to the presence of
cells in the cytoplasm was significantly higher in both control groups compared to the groups
whose mothers were supplemented with HMB. Microscopic observation showed a stronger
response in the chondrocyte cell membrane in the groups in which mothers did not receive
supplementation. In females from the HMB group, the expression of TIMP2 in the cytoplasm
of chondrocytes was weaker compared to the control group. Females from both groups did
not express the tested protein in many cell nuclei. However, when comparing the two study
Table 8. Effect of maternal HMB treatment on the intensity of immunoreactions against MMP13, TIMP2, VEGF, BMP2 in the matrix between III and IV zone of
growth plate cartilage as well as trabecular bone of the humerus in newborn piglets.
Growth plate cartilage Trabecular bone
MMP13, pixel TIMP2, pixel VEGF, pixel BMP2, pixel MMP13, pixel TIMP2, pixel VEGF, pixel BMP2, pixel
Main effect supplementation
Control 167.00 126.18 165.52 174.94 176.54 181.12 178.64 137.76
HMB 156.09 167.44 133.12 119.42 174.82 183.91 180.97 136.81
Main effect sex
Male 160.40 140.92 162.13 120.75 170.76 181.25 180.48 116.33
Female 162.68 150.69 136.50 173.61 182.61 183.78 179.14 156.24
Treatment effect
Control male 173.77c ± 6.80 125.52a ± 6.17 165.13ab ± 6.18 144.30a ± 8.66 172.98a ± 6.93 178.12b ± 5.71 178.06a ± 6.57 117.05a ± 6.47
HMB male 147.03b ± 9.62 156.33b ± 6.01 159.13a ± 7.92 97.13b ± 9.12 168.54a ± 7.60 184.38a ± 7.95 182.89b ± 5.00 115.62a ± 7.81
Control female 160.22a ± 9.77 126.84a ± 6.05 165.90b ± 7.90 205.50c ± 7.18 180.1b ± 8.01 184.12a ± 7.07 179.22ab ± 6.32 154.47b ± 9.56
HMB female 165.14a ± 5.87 174.54c ± 7.97 107.10c ± 5.48 141.71a ± 4.86 185.10b ± 7.01 183.43a ± 6.23 179.05ab ± 3.22 158.00b ± 6.83
Pooled SEM 1.79 1.35 1.61 1.60 1.66 1.32 1.27 1.39
Main effects and interaction
Supplementation <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 0.848 0.043 0.073 0.479
Sex 0.217 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 0.067 0.299 <0.001
Supplementation x sex <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 <0.001 0.012 0.055 0.097
a, b. c—mean values in rows with different letters differ significantly at P<0.05; SEM—standard error of the means.
MMP13—matrix metalloproteinase 13; TIMP2—tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases; BMP2—bone morphogenetic protein 2; VEGF—vascular endothelial growth
factor; Zone III—hypertrophic zone; Zone IV—calcium zone.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.t008
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 15 / 26
Fig 3. Immunohistochemical analysis of the immunolocalization the MMP13 (matrix metalloproteinase 13), the TIMP2
(tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 2), the VEFG (vascular endothelial growth factor) and the BMP2 (bone morphogenetic
protein 2) from the humerus growth plate cartilage. Representative images immunohistochemical analysis carried out on the
formaldehyde-fixed from the humerus growth cartilage of newborn piglets.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.g003
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 16 / 26

=== PAGE 21 ===
Fig 4. Immunohistochemical analysis of the immunolocalization the MMP13 (matrix metalloproteinase 13), the TIMP2 (tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinases 2), the VEFG (vascular endothelial growth factor) and the BMP2 (bone morphogenetic protein 2) from the proliferative
zone of growth plate cartilage. Representative images immunohistochemical analysis carried out on the formaldehyde-fixed from the humerus
growth cartilage of newborn piglets. The positive reaction (presence of MMP13, TIMP2, VEFG, BMP2) in the cytoplasm or cell nucleus was
marked in red, while the lack of expression was marked in blue.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642.g004
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 17 / 26
groups, TIMP2 expression is more pronounced in the group whose mothers did not receive
HMB (Table 7, Figs 3 and 4).
A stronger response in the matrix of growth plate cartilage in zones III and IV was observed
in all groups. Analysis of TIMP expression in the growth plate matrix showed a decrease in
TIMP expression in both HMB groups compared to the control (Table 8, Figs 3 and 4).
Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) immunolocalization in the bone
trabecula and the growth plate cartilage
The BMP2 staining showed expression of this protein in the matrix of and bone trabecular
cells in all groups tested, compared to the negative control. Statistical analysis in the case of a
positive response in the cytoplasm of cells showed no differences between the studied groups.
However, microscopic observation showed that maternal supplementation increased BMP2
expression in the cytoplasm of trabecular bone cells in their offspring, regardless of gender
(Table 7, Fig 2).
Analysis of the expression of this protein in the bone trabecula matrix showed no differ-
ences between the studied groups (Table 8, Fig 2).
In the case of the cartilage, staining for BMP2 showed its presence in all animals both in the
matrix and in the cytoplasm of cells as well as its absence in the nuclei of the cell Statistical
analysis in the case of a positive response to the presence of BMP2 in the cytoplasm of cells
showed that males and females from the HMB groups had a greater response compared to the
control groups. Comparing both sexes not dependent on supplementation, males were charac-
terized by a stronger expression of the tested protein in the cytoplasm of cells (Table 7, Figs 3
and 4). Gray-scale analysis showed higher BMP2 expression in the growth plate matrix in the
HMB groups (Table 8, Figs 3 and 4).
Discussion
The currently available literature also shows that changes in mother’s nutrition significantly
affect the process of the formation of the skeleton system of their offspring. Human studies
show that inadequate maternal nutrition during pregnancy negatively affects the formation of
peak bone mass during prenatal fetal development [2, 39].
The nutritional factor used in this experiment is HMB supplementation. The use of this
supplement during pregnancy contributes to a significant increase in the body weight of new-
born organisms and a proportional increase in the mass of internal organs. The same research
shows that maternal supplementation affects the development of the femur in newborn ani-
mals [17]. In this experiment, the sows were supplemented between 70 and 90 days of preg-
nancy with HMB at a daily dose of 0.2 g/kg b.w. However, there is no information as to
whether this supplement will affect the humerus. Although studies conducted in animal mod-
els show that the growth of the humerus is the fastest and slows down much earlier compared
to other long bones [1]. Therefore in the presented experiment was justified to use the same
dose of this supplement in the same period of pregnancy.
There are a few papers about the HMB influence with animal model usage wherein the
authors decided to use of pig model, which is considered to be the best animal model used in
particular in preclinical and clinical feeding. These animals are characterized by the greatest
similarity to humans in terms anatomical and physiological. In particular, the structure of the
digestive tract, cardiovascular, respiratory, immune and urinary systems. Also their internal
organs are of similar size and perform similar functions [3].
In the presented study, an increase in humerus weight in newborns caused by the supple-
mentation with HMB of their mothers during pregnancy by was observed by 84% in males
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 18 / 26

=== PAGE 22 ===
and by 51% in females, respectively. Regarding the length of the examined humerus, we
observed it is increase only in males by 22%. Only under the effect of HMB the increase in the
value of the bone geometric properties was observed. In males, geometric parameters such as
vertical and horizontal external diameters, cross-sectional area, the mean relative wall thick-
ness, the cortical index and the moment of inertia increased by 22%, 18%, 52%, 36%, 12%, 89%
respectively. However, in the case of females from the experimental group in relation to the
control group, only the geometrical property of the examined bone that has changed is the
moment of inertia, which increased by 45%. Changes in bone geometrical properties are asso-
ciated with changes in their morphology, they are higher in males, which could have contrib-
uted to greater changes in these parameters in this sex. In femoral studies of newborn animals
whose mothers were supplemented with HMB at the same dose and over the same period of
time, the increase in bone mass was proportional for both sexes. In the case of the humerus,
the effect of supplementation is not proportional and is higher in males compared to females
by 19%. Differences were also observed in geometric parameters such as the cross-sectional
area, the mean wall thickness and the cortical index, in which the effect of supplementation
was lower in the humerus than in the femur. For both long bones tested, males showed a
greater effect on maternal supplementation on geometrical properties. The observed differ-
ences between the humerus and femur in HMB groups may be associated with different prena-
tal development of these bones [1, 17].
Changes in the humeral bone morphology and geometric properties in newborn males
from the experimental group improved the mechanical properties of both ultimate strength
and maximum elastic strength by 71% and 113%, respectively. In contrast, females from the
HMB group had a lower increase in ultimate strength and maximum elastic strength by 49%
and 85%, respectively. Both of these forces are significantly higher in males, which is associated
with greater changes in the weight, length and geometrical properties of the humerus in this
sex. An increase in mechanical properties was also observed in the femur, where in male ulti-
mate strength and maximum elastic strength increased by 70% and 77,6%, respectively, while
in females ultimate strength increased by 33,7%. However, in the case of the humerus we are
observed larger changes in mechanical properties compared to the femur [17].
In the presented work, we also examined the effect of mother’s supplementation during
pregnancy on the collagen structure of the cortical bone. Changes in collagen structure can
contribute to changes in their ability to resist the force affecting the skeleton. In males, under
the influence of the supplementation, a decrease in the share of mature collagen fibers and a
ratio of mature to immature collagen was observed by 43% and 55%, respectively. In contrast,
in the HMB females group only an 42% increase of immature collagen fibers was observed.
The results showed that sex significantly influenced the effect of supplementation because such
differences were not observed between the sexes in the control group. Changes in the collagen
structure of the cortical bone may have contributed to the appearance of changes in the exam-
ined mechanical properties of the humerus. Immature collagen fibers undergo the maturation
process and is less mineralized than the mature collagen fibers [34]. We observed the increase
in the share of immature collagen fibers in the examined females and a decrease in the content
of mature collagen fibers in males. This could have contributed to changes in individual
mechanical parameters of the humerus under the influence of HMB supplementation.
Histomorphometric analysis of trabecular bone showed that maternal supplementation
only significantly increased BV/TV in females by 63%, and in males reduced bone thickness by
9% at the humerus epiphysis. However, no changes in trabecular bone histomorphometry
were observed in the humerus metaphysis. In prenatal femoral studies, maternal supplementa-
tion during pregnancy contributed to major changes in trabecular bone histomorphometry at
both the metaphysis and the epiphysis. Where in the femoral epiphysis an increase in the
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 19 / 26
number of bone trabeculae was observed only in males. Other parameters such as BV/TV,
thickness of bone trabeculae in both sexes increased significantly while the size of the trabecu-
lar space decreased. On the other hand, in the femoral metaphysis, changes in trabecular bone
histomorphometry was observed only in female [17]. The observed differences between the
two long bones may be due to different development during fetal life [1]. It should be noted
that the changes in the trabecular histomorphometry of the humerus are much smaller than in
the case of the femur. This may be due to the fact that the bone develops earlier than the femur
and was less intense at the time supplementation began.
On the other hand, we observed changes in the collagen structure of the trabecula bone the
epiphysis and the metahysis. In the HMB males group at the epiphysis the share of immature
and mature collagen fibers decreased, which contributed to a decrease in their ratio compared
to the control group by 45%, 54% and 44%, respectively. In the HMB females group, only a
37% increase of the immature collagen fibers was observed. In the metaphysis of the HMB
males, the share of the immature collagen fibers was reduced by 62%, while there was no
change in the share of the mature collagen fibers, which contributed to an increase in the ratio
of these collagens by 33%. In females in the metaphysis, maternal supplementation increased
the proportion of the immature and mature collagen fibers by 50% and 40%, respectively.
These changes show an increase in the intensity of bone tissue remodeling processes due to the
supplementation of their mothers during pregnancy.
Under the influence of the female supplementation during pregnancy, changes in the artic-
ular and the growth plate cartilage were also observed. Concerning the articular cartilage in
males from the experimental group, an increase in the thickness of all zones was observed, i.e.,
I, II and III, respectively, by 41%, 13%, 54% in relation to the control group, which was sub-
jected to an increase in the total thickness of articular cartilage in this experimental group by
9%. In the case of females from the HMB group, we observed an increase in the thickness of
the zone I, II and the total thickness of the articular cartilage by 19%, 18%, and 11% in relation
to the females from the control group. HMB supplementation also affected BTD, but only in
males, which was significantly lower by 21% compared to the control group. These changes
may affect functions that individual zones of this cartilage perform [40, 41]. Changes in the
thickness of individual zones can affect the functions of articular cartilage, but it should be
noted that the increase in thickness of individual zones is not proportional when comparing
each of them with each other in both sex.
In the case of the growth plate cartilage, we also observed changes in both experimental
groups. In females of this group we observed an increase in the thickness of zones I, II, III in a
total of 15%, 27%, 36%, 16%, respectively. In males, the thickening under the influence of the
HMB was seen in zones II, III by 23% and 31%, with a decrease in the thickness of the zone I
by 25%, and a lack of changes in relation to the control group in the total thickness of the artic-
ular cartilage. In the case of these measurements, we see that the HMB had a greater impact in
females. In the articular cartilage the individual zone size changes may affect the proper func-
tioning of the entire growth plate cartilage, which is the growth plate, and contributes to the
bone growth as a result of the cartilage ossification [42].
Changes that we observed may be the cause of the effect of the tested supplement on the
body’s hormonal balance, as confirmed by the results obtained by Blicharski et al. [17]. In this
work the HMB affects the concentration of IGF-1, leptin and sex hormones, contributing to
the increase in the content of these hormones in the blood serum.
Maintaining the proper relationship between osteolytic and osteogenetic processes signifi-
cantly affects the correct formation of the skeletal system. Normal bone and cartilage resorp-
tion is affected by maintaining a balance between MMP13 and TIMP2. Proteins from the
MMP group are responsible for resorption processes of tissue matrix components. In contrast,
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 20 / 26

=== PAGE 23 ===
proteins from the TIMP group that inhibit the effects of MMPs. The MMP group includes 14
proteins that have been divided according to their structure and function. Lack of certain pro-
teins from this group, including MMP13 (collagenase 3) during embryonic development, has a
negative effect on the formation of growth plates, which impairs bone development and
growth [43]. The TIMP family includes 4 proteins that differ in terms of expression, regulation
as well as the ability to interact with a given metalloproteinase found in a tissue matrix in a
latent form [44]. Therefore, in this study it was examined whether the changed nutrition of
mothers during pregnancy affects the expression of metalloproteinases, especially MMP13 in
bone and cartilage tissue of newborn animals as well as its TIMP2 inhibitor.
In the presented work, HMB supplementation of mothers during pregnancy significantly
influenced the expression of both MMP13 and TIMP2. In the trabecular bone, changes in
MMP13 expression are observed only in females, where supplementation contributed to
increased expression of this protein. However, in the case of the administration of the growth
plate in the mother during pregnancy HMB increased expression of this protein in the cyto-
plasm of chondrocytes their offspring irrespective of sex. In all examined groups, MMP13
expression in the growth plate matrix was the strongest on the border of zones III and IV.
Studies in animal models show that mice in which the gene encoding the MMP13 has been
deleted created disturbances in the bone and the cartilage tissue homeostasis with no change
in their life expectancy and fertility compared to the control group. In individuals deprived of
MMP13, disorders in the growth plate were found as a result of changes in the thickness of the
hypertrophic zone and no change in the thickness of the other zones, which caused an increase
the number of trabecular bone in the absence of regularity in their arrangement, and disorders
in their proper ossification, contributing to weakening their strength and increasing risk of
fracture over the length. At the same time, these changes did not affect bone length [26, 45].
MMP13 affects the degradation of collagen fibers, mainly type II but also type I, which
build support tissues. Changes in the expression of this protein as a result of maternal supple-
mentation can also be combined with analysis of trabecular bone collagen structure, where
changes were observed under the influence of HMB supplementation [26, 45, 46].
In the results obtained in this study, it was observed that in the control group, TIMP2
expression is significantly stronger than the immunological reaction, we obtained in the exper-
imental group in both cartilage and trabecular tissue, which may indicate an increase in
resorption processes in these tissues under the influence of HMB. This can also be confirmed
by the fact that MMP13 expression is stronger in the HMB supplemented group in both carti-
lage and trabecular bone. Research conducted in recent years shows that reduced TIMP levels
contribute to increased bone resorption through stronger expression of metalloproteinases
[46].
Research conducted over the years shows that the expression of MMP13 is not only corre-
lated with the expression of proteins from the TIMP group but also among others with BMP2
[47]. BMP2, the second type of bone morphogenetic protein, plays an important role in the
formation of both the bone and the cartilage tissue. It is a protein that stimulates the formation
of new bone tissue during bone remodeling [24, 25]. It is released during collagen degradation
and stimulates its reconstruction. Research conducted by Johansson et al. [1997] shows that
the BMP2 protein not only stimulates the formation of type II collagen, but also significantly
inhibits the action of collagenase 3 [47].
In this work, we can see that the BMP2 protein expression is stronger in the experimental
group compared to the control group. It should be noted that males, regardless of supplemen-
tation, were characterized by a stronger expression of this protein in both cartilage cells and
matrix, especially, stronger BMP2 expression in between zone III and IV was observed. The
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 21 / 26
obtained results may suggest that bone formation processes occur much faster in animals
whose mothers were supplemented with the HMB during pregnancy.
Increased expression of both BMP2, which inhibits the action of MMP13 and contributes
to the increased synthesis of collagen fibers, as well as collagenase 3 degrading collagen fibers
in bone and cartilage tissue in the offspring of mothers supplemented with HMB during preg-
nancy may suggest that osteolytic as well as osteogenetic processes occur much faster in these
newborns as a result of maternal supplementation. It should also be noted that the expression
of the TIMP2 metalloproteinase inhibitor is weaker in the experimental groups, which may
also confirm the fact of increased remodeling processes of supporting tissues in these animals.
Studies using BMP2 have shown that its activity is highest during endochondral bone devel-
opment, because it affects the proliferation and maturation of cartilage cells. Studies in animal
models show that the lack of BMP2 negatively affects the development of the skeletal system,
which is associated with disorders in the growth plate. The hypertrophic zone in the course of
growth is very important because in this part the blood vessels enter into the growth plate,
stimulating the growth of bone cells, their ossification and the formation of a new matrix [48].
The appearance of blood vessels stimulates bone cells and other cells for production the right
amount of growth factor, which is VEGF [49]. The VEGF, or the endothelial growth factor,
plays crucial role in the endochondral bone development. Research conducted by Carlevaro
et al in 2000 proved that the highest VEGF expression is observed in the hypertrophic zone
and stimulates bone growth in length [49–51].
In this studies all animals, irrespective of group and sex, VEGF was found in the matrix and
nuclei of cartilage cells in the II and III growth cartilage zones. The highest expression of this
protein was observed at the border of zones III and IV, which may confirm that this factor
stimulates intra-cartilaginous growth. The strongest expression of this protein at the border of
the hypertrophic and the calcifying zone can be observed in the HMB females, which may
indicate the effect of both supplementation and sex on the VEGF expression, because the same
effect is not observed in males. On the other hands larger changes in osteometric parameters
under the influence of the HMB are visible in males. Result could be associated with the greater
BMP2 expression in this sex.
There is no research on the effect of HMB on the expression of MMP13, TIMP2, BMP2 and
VEGF in the literature.
It should be noted that proteins identified in this study were characterized by strong expres-
sion in zones II and III and on the border of zones III and IV of growth plate cartilage, which
can also confirm that these proteins affect the process of bone growth in length. Obtained
results that changes in maternal nutrition affect the expression of MMP13, TIMP2, BMP2 and
VEGF in the bone and cartilage tissue of their newborn offspring, which may contribute to
changes in the development of their skeletal system [2].
Maintaining balance in osteolytic and osteogenic processes makes the proper bone tissue
homeostasis and proper growth of this bone tissue [52]. The obtained results suggest that the
bone remodeling processes are significantly more intensive in the experimental group com-
pared to the control group. What can be combined with the previously studies where mass and
length of the femur bone, are significantly higher in animals from the experimental group
[17]. We also observed changes in the thickness of both the articular and the growth cartilage,
which can be associated with changes in the expression of proteins MMP13, TIMP2, BMP2
and VEGF.
To summarize there is no research in the available literature answering the question
whether HMB supplementation of females during pregnancy affects the development of pre-
natal humerus bone. The comparison of the results obtained in this work in relation to the
changes caused by the HMB supplementation on the prenatal development of the femur gives
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 22 / 26

=== PAGE 24 ===
the view that the humerus bone responds in a different way to changes in mother’s nutrition,
which may be due to the fact that the prenatal development of both bones is different. It should
also be noted that checked whether the effect of femoral changes under the influence of HMB
persists later in life as well [16]. Therefore, further researches in this area should also be carried
out to verify if these changes are equally observable in the humerus. Another aspect of our
work that was not previously used in assessing the impact of maternal supplementation on pre-
natal development of the skeletal system of their offspring, was the study of the protein expres-
sion (TIMP2 MMP13, VEGF, BMP2). These proteins, in studies assessing the impact of
adequate nutrition of mothers on the development of their offspring, can be an excellent
markes of the intensity of osteogenic and osteolytic in both the cartilage and the bone tissue.
Our research may be an introduction to the further research on the similarity between the
femur and the humerus in regard to their changes during prenatal development and adapta-
tions to changed conditions.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Agnieszka Tomczyk-Warunek, Tomasz Blicharski, Jaromir Jarecki, Sie-
mowit Muszyński, Ewa Tomaszewska, Lucio C. Rovati.
Data curation: Agnieszka Tomczyk-Warunek, Tomasz Blicharski, Piotr Dobrowolski.
Formal analysis: Tomasz Blicharski, Piotr Dobrowolski, Siemowit Muszyński, Ewa Tomas-
zewska, Lucio C. Rovati.
Funding acquisition: Tomasz Blicharski, Siemowit Muszyński.
Investigation: Agnieszka Tomczyk-Warunek, Tomasz Blicharski, Jaromir Jarecki, Piotr
Dobrowolski, Ewa Tomaszewska.
Methodology: Agnieszka Tomczyk-Warunek, Tomasz Blicharski, Piotr Dobrowolski, Ewa
Tomaszewska.
Project administration: Tomasz Blicharski, Piotr Dobrowolski, Siemowit Muszyński, Ewa
Tomaszewska.
Resources: Tomasz Blicharski.
Supervision: Tomasz Blicharski, Ewa Tomaszewska.
Validation: Agnieszka Tomczyk-Warunek, Tomasz Blicharski, Jaromir Jarecki, Siemowit
Muszyński, Ewa Tomaszewska.
Writing – original draft: Agnieszka Tomczyk-Warunek, Tomasz Blicharski, Jaromir Jarecki,
Piotr Dobrowolski, Siemowit Muszyński.
Writing – review & editing: Agnieszka Tomczyk-Warunek, Tomasz Blicharski, Siemowit
Muszyński.
References
1. Patton JT, Kaufman MH. The timing of ossification of the limb bones, and growth rates of various long
bones of the fore and hind limbs of the prenatal and early postnatal laboratory mouse. J Anat. 1995;
186 (Pt 1)(Pt 1):175–185.
2. Williams EL, Nicholas C Harvey NC, Dennison EM, Edwards ChC, Cooper C. Maternal nutrition and
bone health in the offspring. Int. J Clin Rheumatol. 2009; 4(2): 133–145.
3. Gutierrez K, Dicks N, Glanzner WG, Agellon LB, Bordignon V. Efficacy of the porcine species in bio-
medical research. Front. Genet., 2015; 6: 293. Available from: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.
3389/fgene.2015.00293/full. PMID: 26442109
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 23 / 26
4. Seckl JR: Glucocorticoids, feto-placental 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2, and the early
life origins of adult disease. Steroids. 1997; 62: 89–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0039-128x(96)00165-1
PMID: 9029721
5. Śliwa E, Kowalik S, Tatara MR, Krupski W, Majcher P, Luszczewska-Sierakowska I, et al.: Effect of
alpha-ketoglutarate (AKG) given to pregnant sows on development of humerus and femur in newborns.
Bull Vet Inst Pulawy. 2005; 49: 117–120.
6. Tatara MR, Śliwa E, Krupski W: Prenatal programming of skeletal development in the offspring: effects
of maternal treatment with β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) on femur properties in pigs at slaughter
age. Bone. 2007; 40: 1615–1622. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2007.02.018 PMID: 17433802
7. Smith NH, Ozanne SE: Intrauterine origins of metabolic disease. Rev Gynaecol Perinat Practice. 2006;
6: 211–217.
8. Mantila Roosa SM, Hurd AL, Xu H, Fuchs RK, Warden SJ: Age-related changes in proximal humerus
bone health in healthy, white males. Osteoporos Int. 2012; 23: 2775–2783. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00198-012-1893-1 PMID: 22258805
9. Nissen S, Abumrad NN: Nutritional role of the leucine metabolite β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB). J
Nutr Biochemia. 1997; 8: 300–311.
10. Nissen S, Fuller JC Jr, Sell J, Ferket PR, Rives DV: The effect of β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate on growth,
mortality, carcass quality of broiler chickens. Poult Sci. 1994; 73: 137–155. https://doi.org/10.3382/ps.
0730137 PMID: 8165160
11. Tako E, Ferket PR, Uni Z: Effects of in ovo feeding of carbohydrates and β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate
on the development of chicken intestine. Poult Sci. 2004; 83: 2023–2028. https://doi.org/10.1093/ps/83.
12.2023 PMID: 15615016
12. Nissen S, Sharp RL, Panton L, Vukovich M, Trappe S, Fuller JC Jr: Beta-hydroxy-methylbutyrate
(HMB) supplementation in humans is safe and decrease cardivascular rist factors. J Nutr. 2000; 130(8):
1937–1945. https://doi.org/10.1093/jn/130.8.1937 PMID: 10917905
13. Cieślak D, Zarobkiewicz M Nieradko-Iwanicka B. β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) supplementation
in prevention and treatment of elderly sarcopenia. J Educ Health Sport 2018; 8(10): 41–49.
14. Tatara MR: Neonatal programming of skeletal development in sheep is mediated by somatotrophic axis
function. Experimental Physiology. 2008; 93: 763–772. https://doi.org/10.1113/expphysiol.2007.
041145 PMID: 18263656
15. Tatara MR: Effect of β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) administration on volumetric bone mineral
density, and morphometric and mechanical properties of tibia in male turkeys. J Anim Physiol Anim
Nutr (Berl). 2009; 93(6): 669–677. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0396.2008.00854.x PMID:
18700848
16. Tomaszewska E, Muszyński S, Dobrowolski P, Wiącek D, Tomczyk-Warunek A, Świetlicka I, et al.:
Maternal HMB treatment affects bone and hyaline cartilage development in their weaned piglets via the
leptin/osteoprotegerin system. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl). 2019; 103(2): 626–643. https://doi.org/
10.1111/jpn.13060 PMID: 30659706
17. Blicharski T, Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Hułas-Stasiak M, Muszyński S: A metabolite of leucine
(β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate) given to sows during pregnancy alters bone development of their new-
born offspring by hormonal modulation. PLoS ONE. 2017; 12(6): e0179693. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0179693 PMID: 28617846
18. Świetlicka I, Muszyński S, Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Kwaśniewska A, Świetlicki M, et al.: Prena-
tally administered HMB modifies the enamel surface roughness in spiny mice offspring: An atomic force
microscopy study. Arch Oral Biol. 2016; 70: 24–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.archoralbio.2016.06.001
PMID: 27300492
19. Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Świetlicka I, Muszyński S, Kostro K, Jakubczak A, et al.: Effects of
maternal treatment with β-hydroxy-β-metylbutyrate and 2-oxoglutaric acid on femur development in off-
spring of minks of the standard dark brown type. J Anim Physiol An N. 2018; 102: 299–308. https://doi.
org/10.1111/jpn.12742 PMID: 28503899
20. Rycerz K, Krawczyk A, Jaworska-Adamu J, Szalak R, Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P: Influence of
oral administration of HMB to pregnant dams on calbindin expression in the dentate gyrus of the hippo-
campus during postnatal development in spiny mice offspring. Vet Med-Sci and Pract. 2017; 6: 341–
345.
21. Young BE, McNanley TJ, Cooper EM, McIntyre AW, Witter F, Harris ZL, et al.: Maternal vitamin D status
and calcium intake interact to affect fetal skeletal growth in utero in pregnant adolescents. Am J Clin
Nutr. 2012; 95(5): 1103–1112. https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.111.023861 PMID: 22492380
22. Ch Masih, Francis A, Shriwastava A, Diwedi N, Tiwari P, Nareliya R, et al.: Biomechanical evaluation of
human humerus and scapula bone: a review. Journal of Biomedical and Bioengineering. 2012; 3(1):
63–66.
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 24 / 26

=== PAGE 25 ===
23. Liu Y, Olsen B R: Distinct VEGF Functions During Bone Developmentand Homeostasis. Arch. Immunol
Ther Exp. 2014; 62: 363–368.
24. Kochanowska I, Chaberek S, Wojtowicz S, Marczyński B, Włodarski K, Dytko M, et al.: Expression of
genes for bone morphogeneticproteins BMP-2, BMP-4 and BMP-6 in various parts of the human skele-
ton. BMC Musculoskel Dis. 2007; 8(128): 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-8-128 PMID:
18162128
25. Shu B, Zhang M, Xie R, Wang M, Jin H, Hou W, et al.: BMP2, but not BMP4, is crucial for chondrocyte
proliferation and maturation during endochondral bone development. J Cell Sci. 2011; 124(Pt 20):
3428–3440. https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.083659 PMID: 21984813
26. Inada M, Wang Y, Byrne MH, Rahman MU, Miyaura C, Lo´pez-Otı´n C, et al: Critical roles for collage-
nase-3 (MMP13) in development of growth plate cartilage and in endochondral ossification. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2004; 101(49): 17192–17197. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0407788101 PMID:
15563592
27. Gra¨ssel S, Beckmann J, Rath B, Vogel M, Grifka J, Tingart M: Expression profile of matrix metalloprotei-
nase-2 and -9 and their endogenous tissue inhibitors in osteonecrotic femoral heads. International Jour-
nal of Molecular Medicine. 2010; 26: 127–133. https://doi.org/10.3892/ijmm_00000444 PMID:
20514432
28. Hułas-Stasiak M, Jakubowicz-Gil J, Dobrowolski P, Tomaszewska E, Muszyński S. Maternal β-
hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) supplementation during pregnancy affects early folliculogenesis in the
ovary of newborn piglets. Theriogenology. 2019; 128: 91–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.theriogenology.
2019.02.003 PMID: 30743108
29. Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P. Maternal glucocorticoid treatment as a model for examining foetal
gender-specific effects on the development that influences the bone metabolism of neonatal piglets.
Bull Vet Inst Pulawy. 2012; 56: 247–253.
30. Muszyński S, Kwiecień M, Tomaszewska E, Świetlicka I, Dobrowolski P, Kasperek K, et al.: Effect of
caponization on performance and quality characteristics of long bones in Polbar chickens. Poult Sci.
2017; 96: 491–500. https://doi.org/10.3382/ps/pew301 PMID: 27591270
31. Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Puzio I: Morphological changes of the cartilage and bone in newborn
piglets evoked by experimentally induced glucocorticoid excess during pregnancy. J Anim Physiol Anim
Nutr (Berl). 2013; 97: 785–796. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0396.2012.01319.x PMID: 22716040
32. Suvara SK, Layton C, Bancroft JD: Bancroft’s theory and practice of histological techniques. 7th ed.,
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2013.
33. Dobrowolski P, Tomaszewska E, Kurlak P, Pierzynowski SG: Dietary 2-oxoglutarate mitigates gastrec-
tomy-evoked structural changes in cartilage of female rats. Exp Biol Med. 2016; 241: 14–24. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1535370215595466 PMID: 26202375
34. Muszyński S, Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Kwiecień M, Wiącek D, Świetlicka I, et al: Analysis of
bone osteometry, mineralization, mechanical and histomorphometrical properties of tibiotarsus in
broiler chickens demonstrates a influence of dietary chickpea seeds (Cicer arietinum L.) inclusion as a
primary protein source. PLoS ONE. 2018; 13(12): e0208921. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0208921 PMID: 30533027
35. Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Bieńko M, Prost Ł, Szymańczyk S, Zdybel A: Effects of 2-oxoglutaric
acid on bone morphometry, densitometry, mechanics, and immunohistochemistryin 9-month-old boars
with prenatal dexamethasone-induced osteopenia. Connect Tissue Res. 2015; 56: 483–492. https://
doi.org/10.3109/03008207.2015.1069822 PMID: 26305209
36. Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Wydrych J: Postnatal administration of 2-oxoglutaric acid improves
articular and growth plate cartilages and bone tissue morphology in pigs prenatally treated with dexa-
methasone. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2012; 63: 547–554. PMID: 23211309
37. Zhao QH, Lin LP, Guo YX, Zou R, Wang Z, Shi ZP, et al: Matrix metalloproteinase-13, NF-κB p65 and
interleukin-1β are associated with the severity of knee osteoarthritis. Exp Ther Med. 2020; 19: 3620–
3626. https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2020.8618 PMID: 32346426
38. Tomaszewska E, Dobrowolski P, Puzio I, Donaldson J, Muszyński S: Acrylamide-Induced Prenatal Pro-
gramming of Bone Structure in Mammal Model. Ann Anim Sci. 2020; 20(4): 1257–1287.
39. Dammann O, Matthews SG: Glucocorticoid therapy in the fetus and newborn-introduction. Semin in
Neon. 2001; 6: 283–284.
40. Sophia Fox AJ, Bedi A, Rodeo SA: The Basic Science of Articular Cartilage: Structure, Composition,
and Function. Sports Health. 2009; 1(6): 461–468. https://doi.org/10.1177/1941738109350438 PMID:
23015907
41. Poole AR, Kojima T, Yasuda T, Mwale F, Kobayashi M, Laverty S: Composition and Structure of Articu-
lar Cartilage: A Template for Tissue Repair. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2001; 391(Suppl): 26–33. https://
doi.org/10.1097/00003086-200110001-00004 PMID: 11603710
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 25 / 26
42. Hunziker E: Mechanism of longitudinal bone growth and its regulation by growth plate chondrocytes.
Microsc Res Tech. 1994; 28: 505–551. https://doi.org/10.1002/jemt.1070280606 PMID: 7949396
43. Tokuhara CK, Santesso MR, de Oliveira DSN, da Silva Ventura TM, Doyama JT, Zambuzzi WF, de Oli-
veira RC: Updating the role of matrix metalloproteinases in mineralized tissue and related diseases. J
Appl Oral Sci. 2019; 27:e20180596. https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-7757-2018-0596 PMID: 31508793
44. Deng X, He G, Levine A, Cao Y, Mullins C: Adenovirus-mediated expression of TIMP-1 and TIMP-2 in
bone inhibits osteolytic degradation by human prostate cancer. Int J Cancer. 2008; 122: 209–218.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.23053 PMID: 17847032
45. Sasano Y, Zhu JX, Tsubota M, Takahashi I, Onodera K, Mizoguchi I, et al.: Gene expression of MMP8
and MMP13 during embryonic development of bone and cartilage in the rat mandible and hind limb. J
Histochem Cytochem. 2002; 50(3): 325–332. https://doi.org/10.1177/002215540205000304 PMID:
11850435
46. Sobue T, Hakeda Y, Kobayashi Y, Hayakawa H, Yamashita K, Aoki T, et al.: Tissue inhibitor of metallo-
proteinases 1 and 2 directly stimulate the bone-resorbing activity of isolated mature osteoclasts. J Bone
Miner Res. 2001; 16(12): 2205–2214. https://doi.org/10.1359/jbmr.2001.16.12.2205 PMID: 11760833
47. Johansson N, Saarialho-Kere U, Airola K, Herva R, Nissinen L, Westermarck J, et al: Osteoblasts dur-
ing human fetal bone development. Developmental Dynamics. 1997; 208: 387–397. PMID: 9056642
48. Pan Q, Yu Y, Chen Q, Li C, Wu H, Wan Y, et al.: Sox9, a key transcription factor of bone morphogenetic
protein–2–induced chondrogenesis, is activated through BMP pathway and a CCAAT box in the proxi-
mal promoter. J Cell Physiol. 2008; 217: 228–241. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcp.21496 PMID: 18506848
49. Hu K, Olsen BR: Osteoblast–derived VEGF regulates osteoblast differentiation and bone formation dur-
ing bone repair. J Clin Invest. 2006; 26: 509–526.
50. Carlavaro MF, Cermelil S, Cancedda R, Descalzi Cancedda F: Vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) in cartilage neaoscularization and chondrocyte differentiation: auto-paracrine role during endo-
chondral bone formation. J Cell Sci. 2000; 112: 59–69.
51. Murata M, Yudoh K, Masuko K: Review The potential role of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
in cartilage. How the angiogenic factor could be involved in the pathogenesis of osteoarhitis? Osteoar-
thritis Cartilage. 2008; 16: 279–286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joca.2007.09.003 PMID: 17945514
52. Hadjidakis D J, Androulakis I I: Bone Remodeling Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 2006; 1092: 385–396. https://
doi.org/10.1196/annals.1365.035 PMID: 17308163
PLOS ONE
The effect of maternal HMB supplementation on bone and cartilage tissue
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0240642 February 24, 2021 26 / 26
