
=== PAGE 1 ===
 International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences
Article
Fourier Transform Infrared Microspectroscopy Combined with
Principal Component Analysis and Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
for the Study of the Effect of β-Hydroxy-β-Methylbutyrate
(HMB) Supplementation on Articular Cartilage
Izabela ´Swietlicka 1,*
 , Siemowit Muszy ´ nski1
 , Carina Prein 2,3,4 , Hauke Clausen-Schaumann 2,4
 ,
Attila Aszodi 3
 , Marcin B. Arciszewski 5
 , Tomasz Blicharski 6
 , Mariusz Gago´ s7,8 , Michał ´Swietlicki 9
 ,
Piotr Dobrowolski 10, Katarzyna Kras 5, Ewa Tomaszewska 11
 and Marta Arczewska 1,*
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: ´Swietlicka, I.; Muszy ´ nski,
S.; Prein, C.; Clausen-Schaumann, H.;
Aszodi, A.; Arciszewski, M.B.;
Blicharski, T.; Gago´ s, M.;´Swietlicki,
M.; Dobrowolski, P .; et al. Fourier
Transform Infrared
Microspectroscopy Combined with
Principal Component Analysis and
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks for the
Study of the Effect of β-Hydroxy-
β-Methylbutyrate (HMB)
Supplementation on Articular
Cartilage. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22,
9189. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijms22179189
Academic Editor: Alfonso Baldi
Received: 26 July 2021
Accepted: 24 August 2021
Published: 25 August 2021
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1 Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Environmental Biology, University of Life Sciences in Lublin,
20-950 Lublin, Poland; siemowit.muszynski@up.lublin.pl
2 Center for Applied Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine-CANTER, Munich University of Applied
Sciences, 80335 Munich, Germany; carina.prein@uwo.ca (C.P .); hauke.clausen-schaumann@hm.edu (H.C.-S.)
3 Laboratory of Cartilage Development, Diseases and Regeneration, Department for Orthopaedics and Trauma
Surgery, Musculoskeletal University Centre Munich (MUM), University Hospital, LMU Munich,
82152 Planegg, Germany; attila.aszodi@med.uni-muenchen.de
4 Center for Nanoscience-CeNS, 80799 Munich, Germany
5 Department of Animal Anatomy and Histology, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, 20-950 Lublin, Poland;
mb.arciszewski@wp.pl (M.B.A.); katarzyna.kras@up.lublin.pl (K.K.)
6 Chair and Department of Rehabilitation and Orthopedics, Medical University in Lublin,
20-090 Lublin, Poland; tomasz.blicharski@umlub.pl
7 Department of Cell Biology, Maria Curie Sklodowska University, 20-031 Lublin, Poland;
mariusz.gagos@poczta.umcs.lublin.pl
8 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of Lublin, 20-093 Lublin, Poland
9 Department of Applied Physics, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Lublin University of Technology,
20-618 Lublin, Poland; m.swietlicki@pollub.pl
10 Department of Functional Anatomy and Cytobiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology,
Maria Curie-Sklodowska University, 20-033 Lublin, Poland; piotr.dobrowolski@poczta.umcs.lublin.pl
11 Department of Animal Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Life Sciences in Lublin,
20-950 Lublin, Poland; ewaRST@interia.pl
* Correspondence: izabela.swietlicka@up.lublin.pl (I. ´S.); marta.arczewska@up.lublin.pl (M.A.)
Abstract: The potential of Fourier Transform infrared microspectroscopy (FTIR microspectroscopy)
and multivariate analyses were applied for the classiﬁcation of the frequency ranges responsible for
the distribution changes of the main components of articular cartilage (AC) that occur during dietary
β-hydroxy-β-methyl butyrate (HMB) supplementation. The FTIR imaging analysis of histological AC
sections originating from 35-day old male piglets showed the change in the collagen and proteoglycan
contents of the HMB-supplemented group compared to the control. The relative amount of collagen
content in the superﬁcial zone increased by more than 23% and in the middle zone by about 17%,
while no changes in the deep zone were observed compared to the control group. Considering
proteoglycans content, a signiﬁcant increase was registered in the middle and deep zones, respec-
tively; 62% and 52% compared to the control. AFM nanoindentation measurements collected from
animals administered with HMB displayed an increase in AC tissue stiffness by detecting a higher
value of Young’s modulus in all investigated AC zones. We demonstrated that principal component
analysis and artiﬁcial neural networks could be trained with spectral information to distinguish AC
histological sections and the group under study accurately. This work may support the use and
effectiveness of FTIR imaging combined with multivariate analyses as a quantitative alternative to
traditional collagenous tissue-related histology.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22179189 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 2 of 19
Keywords: FTIR microspectroscopy; atomic force microscopy; β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate supple-
mentation; animal model; articular cartilage; collagen; proteoglycans; principal component analysis;
artiﬁcial neural networks
1. Introduction
Articular cartilage (AC) is a non-vascular type of connective tissue covering the end of
bones forming synovial joints to facilitate the distribution of loads across articular surfaces
with a low frictional coefﬁcient and buffer vibration [1]. The extracellular matrix (ECM) of
AC is composed of a dense network of ﬁbrillary collagen (primarily, type II collagen) that is
associated with other non-collagenous proteins and proteoglycans (PGs) [2,3]. Structurally,
the mature, non-calciﬁed AC tissue demonstrates zonal heterogeneity due to the orien-
tation of the collagen ﬁbrils and molecular composition, thus it is subdivided into three
histological zones (superﬁcial zone (SZ), middle zone (MZ) and deep zone (DZ), of which
the latter is separated from the calciﬁed AC zone by the tidemark) [4]. In the relatively thin
SZ with the lowest PGs content [5] but a high level of collagen, collagen ﬁbrils are oriented
in parallel to the AC surface. Such an arrangement is responsible for most of the tensile
stiffness of cartilage. In the MZ (ca. 60% of total AC thickness), collagen ﬁbrils are mostly
randomly organized, while in the DZ they are aligned perpendicular to the AC surface [5,6].
The speciﬁc structural framework of the collagen ﬁbril network, their organization and
the alterations in the content and spatial distribution of the main molecular components
are responsible for the tensile biomechanical properties of AC [ 7,8]. The concentration
of PGs is unevenly distributed throughout the tissue depth and reaches its maximum
in the DZ. Among the PG family, largely aggregating aggrecan is considered the most
crucial to the proper functioning of AC. It contains covalently attached side chains of the
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), chondroitin sulphate (CS) and keratin sulphate (KS) linked
to a protein core. The CS chains of aggrecan play a major role in absorbing free ions and
water into cartilaginous tissues, which provides the basis of its hydrodynamic viscoelastic
properties as a weight-bearing tissue [9]. In this way, PGs are mainly responsible for the
resiliency and compressive properties of AC. Unfortunately, AC, if damaged, displays a
limited ability to self-regenerate [10,11]. Therefore, there is an ongoing intensive search
for novel therapies, including preventive interventions and therapeutic solutions that can
stimulate tissue regeneration and reduce cartilage degeneration.
HMB (β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate) is a natural, bioactive metabolite of the essential
amino acid leucine. It has recently gained popularity as a dietary supplement due to
its many beneﬁcial effects on the skeletal system of animals via protective, anti-catabolic
mechanisms and a direct inﬂuence on protein synthesis [12–14]. HMB has been shown to
reduce protein breakdown by decreasing proteasome expression and proteasome enzyme
activity, inhibit caspase up-regulation and limit apoptosis of muscle nuclei [15,16]. More-
over, Santos-Fandila et al. [17] reported in the brain microdialysis experiment that after
being orally administered, HMB is able to cross the blood-brain barrier, which opens up
new ways for its nutritional interventions, particularly concerning anti-ageing cognitive
beneﬁts. Regarding AC tissue, several studies have shown that the supplementation of
HMB affects the distribution and structure of cartilage components [ 18–21]. The more
signiﬁcant changes after prenatal and maternal HMB-treatment of animals were seen in
enhancing proteoglycan content and an intensive process of collagen synthesis.
The fundamental parameters such as collagen content, its integrity, the orientation
of collagen ﬁbers and PGs content provide information about the AC quality [ 3]. How-
ever, the spatial distribution of collagen and PGs is hardly measurable with conventional
biochemical methods. To address this problem, techniques that can visualize the spatial
distribution of AC molecular components are required. Fourier transform infrared mi-
crospectroscopy, being a powerful technique, can quantitatively evaluate the distribution
of chemical composition of biological tissues. It gives the possibility of simultaneously

=== PAGE 2 ===
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 3 of 19
achieving the collection of infrared spectra and spectral maps based on the absorbance of a
speciﬁc molecular species with satisfactory spatial and spectral resolutions [22]. So far, FTIR
spectroscopy and its combination with microscopic visualization of the AC tissue have been
successfully applied both to evaluate the relative changes in its composition and the spatial
distribution of main AC components [23–26]. The development of FTIR spectroscopy in
the AC research to provide a new strategy for rapid diagnosis of degenerative disease was
reported elsewhere [27–30] and demonstrated by the changes in the spatial distribution
of various components of AC mapped by FTIR microspectroscopy [31]. Using advanced
multivariate data analysis methods, FTIR microspectroscopy can reveal hidden structures
within spectral data concerning the tissue composition and structure, thereby helping
improve medical diagnostics of cartilage diseases or monitor therapeutic progress [ 31].
Yin et al. [32] applied FTIR imaging to examine the collagen and PG levels and their depth
dependence on healthy and osteoarthritis-affected cartilages. This technique has also been
used to assess chemical changes associated with load, disuse, degradation and repair in
cartilage and micro-damage in bone [33,34].
The present study aimed to involve multiple techniques, including FTIR microspec-
troscopy and atomic force microscopy (AFM), and combine them with multivariate meth-
ods such as principal component analysis (PCA) and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs)
to reveal the variations in the structure and properties of cartilage tissue. We developed a
swine model to investigate in vivo the inﬂuence of HMB supplementation during the fetal
period on articular cartilage. The pig provides an attractive model to human health research
priorities and nutritional studies because of many similarities to humans in structure and
function, including the size of internal organs, feeding patterns, drug metabolism and
dietary habits [35]. There is a general acceptance of the pig as a biomedical model after
sequencing the complete swine genome and ﬁnding a high sequence homology to humans
(ca. 60%) [35,36]. To our knowledge, there is no investigation regarding the HMB-related
spatial distribution of collagen and proteoglycans in the extracellular matrix of cartilage
tissue utilizing FTIR imaging and methods of multivariate data analysis.
2. Results and Discussion
Articular cartilage is recognized as a tissue with structure, composition and functional
properties that relevantly change during skeletal maturation. Observed alterations include
but are not limited to increasing collagen network density, reorganization of chondrocytes
and decrease in cellularity [ 37]. β-hydroxy β-methylbutyrate, administered during the
prenatal period, was proved to enhance the mechanical, morphological and physiological
features of tissues of offspring [20,38–42]. Since the mechanism of HMB action remains
unknown, it is hypothesized that HMB could affect protein metabolism acting on several
levels, e.g., inhibiting proteolysis, attenuating depression in protein synthesis, metabolic
inhibitors and promoting protein synthesis [43–46], which is manifested by modiﬁcations
in skeletal muscle structure as well as by changes in the mechanical and morphological
properties of bone [18,20,40,42,47] and teeth [41]. Therefore, the ﬁrst step of our research
was to apply FTIR microspectroscopy to map the changes in the spatial distribution of
AC components.
Figure 1A shows the average infrared absorption spectra collected from the superﬁcial,
middle and deep zones of cartilage, corresponding to the areas shown in Figure 2A. The
characteristic bands of collagen and PGs cover the range of 1800–960 cm−1, including the
amide I (1700–1600 cm−1), the amide II (1600–1500 cm−1), the amide III (1300–1200 cm−1)
and the C–O stretching vibrations of the carbohydrate residues in collagens and PGs
(1140–960 cm−1) [48]. The bands located between the spectral range of 1500–1300 cm −1
are mixed and relate to CH 2 and CH3 vibrations and CH2 side chains vibrations of col-
lagen [32,33]. More importantly, the bands located at 1338 cm −1 and in the region of
1080–1060 cm−1 are the most suitable for distinguishing collagen and PGs [ 49]. Since
the absorption bands in the spectra of biological samples often overlap each other and
the bands originating from collagen and other molecules of AC, such as chondroitin sul-
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 4 of 19
phate, are located in the same region, the second derivative method has been applied to
enhance resolution in identifying subbands and better evaluate the spectral changes [50,51].
Rieppo et al. [29] reported a practical approach based on a second derivative analysis of
collagen and PGs for the analysis of articular cartilage composition. The most signiﬁcant
peaks obtained from the second derivative spectra are shown in Figure 1B, while the
assignments of the minima found in the 2nd derivative spectra are presented in Table 1.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 4 of 19 
 
 
in the same region, the second derivative method has been applied to enhance resolution 
in identifying subbands and better evaluate the spectral changes [50,51]. Rieppo et al. [29] 
reported a practical approach based on a second derivative analysis of collagen and PGs 
for the analysis of articular cartilage composition. The most significant peaks obtained 
from the second derivative spectra are shown in Figure 1B, while the assignments of the 
minima found in the 2nd derivative spectra are presented in Table 1. 
 
Figure 1. (A) Mean ( n = 75 spectra) FTIR spectra of the cartilage matrix  from control (blue line) and HMB-treated pigs 
(magenta line) in three regions after background correction and normalization based on the amide I band intensity, and 
(B) mean second-derivative spectra from the same samples calculated using the Savitzky- Golay algorithm with nine 
smoothing points. The second-der ivative band assignments were given in Table 1. The band positions in black indicate 
the same values for all samples. HMB—supplemented grou p, SZ—superficial zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—deep zone. 
 
Figure 2. (A) The visible light microscopic images (MI) and represen tative chemical maps of porcine cartilage in three 
histological zones: superficial zone (SZ), middle zone (MZ) and deep zone (DZ), along with (B) the histograms of structural 
Figure 1. (A) Mean (n = 75 spectra) FTIR spectra of the cartilage matrix from control (blue line) and HMB-treated pigs
(magenta line) in three regions after background correction and normalization based on the amide I band intensity, and
(B) mean second-derivative spectra from the same samples calculated using the Savitzky-Golay algorithm with nine
smoothing points. The second-derivative band assignments were given in Table 1. The band positions in black indicate the
same values for all samples. HMB—supplemented group, SZ—superﬁcial zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—deep zone.
Signiﬁcant differences in the mean second-derivative spectra were found in the amide
I band of the collagen helix and at the carbohydrates regions commonly used to estimate col-
lagen and proteoglycan contents. The bands localized at 1695 cm−1, 1635 cm−1 and about
1660 cm−1 were assigned as characteristics for β-sheet and α-helix structures of amide I.
The increase in the band intensity at 1635 cm−1 may indicate the presence of proteins with
a more β-sheet structure for the HMB-supplemented samples in the SZ compared to the
control. Moreover, a more prominent intensity of this band was observed in collagen-rich
tissues due to the cross-linked collagen ﬁbers [52]. In the mouse model, the presence of a
1635 cm−1 band indicated proteoglycan synthesis by surface activated chondrocytes [53].
Hence, the more reliable explanation of these alterations could cover newly synthesized
collagen produced by activated chondrocytes or other unknown cartilage proteins observed
in the HMB-supplemented samples, especially in the superﬁcial zone. The obtained results
are consistent with our previous work, in which signiﬁcantly changed collagen structure in
the articular cartilage of maternal HMB-supplemented newborn piglets was reported [18].
On the other hand, a higher relative contribution of extended β-sheets was observed in the
dried tissue matrix [54]. It is worth mentioning that some limitations due to air drying of
AC samples before FTIR analysis should be taken into account, especially in evaluating
the amide I band. Water plays an essential role in maintaining the extracellular matrix,
and dehydration may cause some changes in the structural organization of molecular
components constituting articular cartilage, mainly collagen [ 55]. Kemp et al. reported
that collagen ﬁbril D-spacing decreases with dehydration, contributing to compromised
mechanical integrity [56]. In the FTIR analysis of fully hydrated tissues, the absorbance
band from water’s bending vibration near 1640 cm−1 overlaps seriously with the amide I
band; therefore, tissue samples are generally dehydrated before analyses [31,48,57,58].

=== PAGE 3 ===
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 5 of 19
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 4 of 19
in the same region, the second derivative method has been applied to enhance resolution 
in identifying subbands and better evaluate the spectral changes [50,51]. Rieppo et al. [29] 
reported a practical approach based on a second derivative analysis of collagen and PGs
for the analysis of articular cartilage composition. The most significant peaks obtained 
from the second derivative spectra are shown in Figure 1B, while the assignments of the 
minima found in the 2nd derivative spectra are presented in Table 1. 
Figure 1. (A) Mean (n = 75 spectra) FTIR spectra of the cartilage matrix  from control (blue line) and HMB-treated pigs 
(magenta line) in three regions after background correction and normalization based on the amide I band intensity, and 
(B) mean second-derivative spectra from the same samples calculated using the Savitzky- Golay algorithm with nine 
smoothing points. The second-der ivative band assignments were given in Table 1. The band positions in black indicate 
the same values for all samples. HMB—supplemented grou p, SZ—superficial zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—deep zone. 
Figure 2. (A) The visible light microscopic images (MI) and represen tative chemical maps of porcine cartilage in three 
histological zones: superficial zone (SZ), middle zone (MZ) and deep zone (DZ), along with (B) the histograms of structural
Figure 2. (A) The visible light microscopic images (MI) and representative chemical maps of porcine cartilage in three
histological zones: superﬁcial zone (SZ), middle zone (MZ) and deep zone (DZ), along with ( B) the histograms of structural
parameters characterizing articular cartilage: collagen content, collagen integrity and proteoglycans content with statistically
signiﬁcant differences between groups (at p < 0.05) marked with *. Chemical maps were constructed by integrating the area
under the amide I band 1700−1600 cm−1 (CC) as the ratio of the area of the CH2 side chain of collagen 1360–1325 cm−1
absorption to the amide II 1590–1490 cm−1 (CI) and by integrating the area of the region assigned to the proteoglycans sugar
ring 1140–965 cm−1 (PG) in control and HMB-treated samples. The color scale indicates the pixel values for all parameters.
These maps were typical of all samples. The scale bars correspond to 20 µm. HMB—supplemented group, SZ—superﬁcial
zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—deep zone, CC—collagen content, CI—collagen integrity, PG—proteoglycans content.
No significant differences in band locations were found in the region between1500 cm−1
and 1200 cm−1, except for the spectral shift (~4 cm−1) of a band at 1338 cm−1 assigned to
the CH2 side-chain vibrations in the case of HMB-supplemented samples. This band is
commonly used to qualitatively estimate the integrity of the collagen network because it is
not present in the pure PG spectrum [49,57]. The absorption intensity of the PG-related
second derivative bands increased, especially for the DZ zone. In addition, a band at
1074 cm−1 showed the variability with the larger spectral shift towards higher wavenum-
bers in the HMB supplemented groups compared to the control. Interestingly, a band
at 1055 cm−1 presented only in the DZ zone of the control group, while in the case of
HMB-supplemented samples, it was observed in low depth regions of cartilage.
As shown in Figure 2A, chemical maps present cartilage samples as distributions of
functional groups characteristic of the selected components of cartilage, namely collagen
and proteoglycans. Chemical maps converted into quantities proportional to the integrated
area of the chosen bands were used to characterize its structural parameters quantitatively.
Mean values of collagen content (CC), collagen integrity (CI) and proteoglycans content
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 6 of 19
(PG) were compared between the control and HMB groups in each zone (complete data
available in the Supplementary Material, Figures S1–S3).
Table 1. The most signiﬁcant bands obtained from the second derivative FTIR spectra. An assignment of spectral features
was collected according to the literature [23,25,26,29,57,59].
Wavenumber [cm−1] Assignment of Second Derivative FTIR Bands of AC
1695, ~1660, 1635 80% ν(C=O), 20% ν(CN), τ(HOH), amide I from PGs, water
1550 60% τ(N–H), 30% ν(C–N), 10% ν(C–C), amide II
1457 δas (CH3)
1403 νs(COO−) of GAGs
1378 δs (CH3) of GAGs
~1340 CH 2 side-chain vibrations of collagen II
1238 νas SO3− of sulphated GAGs with CH2 wagging vibration from the glycine backbone and proline side-chain
1204 ν(C−N) of amide III, δ(N−H) of collagen
1161 ν(C–O) of the carbohydrate residues
1122 νas(C–O–S)
1080–1060 ν(C–O) of the carbohydrate residues in PGs,
νsSO3− of sulphated GAGs
~1050 ν(C–O) of the carbohydrate residues in collagen and PGs
1033 ν(C–O) of the carbohydrate residues in collagen and PGs
The symbols concerning the vibrations assignment are related to the vibrational stretching mode (ν), deformational (δ), bending (τ), and
symmetrical (s) and asymmetrical (as) modes.
Obtained results show (Figure 2B) that in the group supplemented with HMB during
the prenatal period, the collagen content increased in the SZ by more than 23% and in
the MZ by about 17%, while no changes in the deep zone compared to the control group
were observed. In the experimental group, a signiﬁcant (approximately 55%) increase in
the integrity of collagen in the surface zone were also detected. Interestingly, all three
zones proved to be inﬂuenced by HMB administration when proteoglycans content was
considered. A signiﬁcant increase was observed in all of the examined areas; however, the
highest ones were registered in the middle (62% compared to the control) and deep (52%
compared to the control) zones. Achieved results are in line with histological proteoglycan
staining (Supplementary Material, Figure S4).
It is proven that any modiﬁcation in tissue organization is reﬂected in changes in
mechanical features such as elasticity, stiffness and others [37]. Furthermore, mechanical
properties measured in the nanoscale are recognized to be highly correlated with the struc-
ture of biological materials determined with spectral methods [60]. To examine whether
structural alterations inﬂuenced tissue elasticity, AFM nanoindentation measurements
were carried out.
Conducted AFM analysis revealed differences in the mechanical properties of articular
cartilage collected from animals administered with HMB during the prenatal period when
compared to the control. A shift towards higher values of Young’s modulus was detected
for all the zones (Figure 3, Table 2), with the greatest being observed for the superﬁcial and
middle zones. According to our previous work [19], where the higher presence of collagen
ﬁbers (indicating higher collagen maturity), increased AC thickness and PGs content in
offspring were also observed, prenatal HMB supplementation upregulated leptin indirectly
by enhancing the growth hormone IGF-1 and the pituitary-gonadal axis, which led to
cell proliferation and more advanced collagen maturation. Those ﬁndings may explain
the observed increase in tissue stiffness, which, among others, depends on both collagen
content and the distribution of the chondrocytes within the tissue [61–64].

=== PAGE 4 ===
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 7 of 19
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 7 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Height (I) and vertical deflection (II) images of AC zones with corresponding hist ograms of Young’s modulus 
distribution (III) determined for SZ (panel A), MZ (panel B) and DZ (panel C) with Gaussian functions fitted. Scale bars 
are equal to 2 μm. HMB—supplemented group, SZ—superfici al zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—deep zone. 
Table 2. Values of Young’s modulus given as means ± SD. Statistically significant differences be-
tween groups (at p < 0.05) were signed by a, b, c and d. 
Group Zone Young’s Modulus 
[kPa] 
Control SZ 33.88 (±0.58) a 
HMB SZ 88.82 (±1.18) b 
Control MZ 29.16 (±0.67) a 
HMB MZ 80.02 (±0.74) b 
Control DZ 1st peak 40.02 (±1.03) a 
2nd peak 77.58 (±0.79) b 
HMB DZ 1st peak 42.72 (±1.51) c 
2nd peak 81.38 (±1.19) d 
HMB—supplemented group, SZ —superficial zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—deep zone, CC—
collagen content, CI—collagen integrity, PG—proteoglycans content. The first peak in a bimodal 
distribution of Young’s modulus in the DZ is connected with the proteoglycan phase, while the 
second peak is attributed to the collagen phase [61,65]. 
On the other hand, the chemical compositio n of AC could change during cartilage 
growth and maturation as a result of differen t joint loadings [25]. In our experiment, the 
HMB-supplemented male piglets had a higher body weight at weaning compared to the 
control groups (Table S1 in the Supplementary Materials). This feature could also be as-
sociated with higher joint loading or an adaptation to the amount of mechanical loading. 
Saadat et al. have reported an increase in PG content in a rabbit model due to physiologic 
in vivo cyclical joint loading localized in the DZ only, with unchanged collagen content 
Figure 3. Height (I) and vertical deﬂection (II) images of AC zones with corresponding histograms of Young’s modulus
distribution (III) determined for SZ (panel A), MZ (panel B) and DZ (panel C) with Gaussian functions ﬁtted. Scale bars are
equal to 2 µm. HMB—supplemented group, SZ—superﬁcial zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—deep zone.
Table 2. Values of Young’s modulus given as means± SD. Statistically signiﬁcant differences between
groups (at p < 0.05) were signed by a, b, c and d.
Group Zone Young’s Modulus
[kPa]
Control SZ 33.88 ( ±0.58) a
HMB SZ 88.82 (±1.18) b
Control MZ 29.16 ( ±0.67) a
HMB MZ 80.02 (±0.74) b
Control DZ 1st peak 40.02 ( ±1.03) a
2nd peak 77.58 (±0.79) b
HMB DZ 1st peak 42.72 ( ±1.51) c
2nd peak 81.38 (±1.19) d
HMB—supplemented group, SZ—superﬁcial zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—deep zone, CC—collagen content,
CI—collagen integrity, PG—proteoglycans content. The ﬁrst peak in a bimodal distribution of Young’s modulus in
the DZ is connected with the proteoglycan phase, while the second peak is attributed to the collagenphase [61,65].
On the other hand, the chemical composition of AC could change during cartilage
growth and maturation as a result of different joint loadings [ 25]. In our experiment,
the HMB-supplemented male piglets had a higher body weight at weaning compared to
the control groups (Table S1 in the Supplementary Materials). This feature could also be
associated with higher joint loading or an adaptation to the amount of mechanical loading.
Saadat et al. have reported an increase in PG content in a rabbit model due to physiologic
in vivo cyclical joint loading localized in the DZ only, with unchanged collagen content [66].
This ﬁnding indicates a healthy joint response in which chondrocytes detect and react to
the changes in their mechanical environment by activating proteoglycan biosynthesis.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 8 of 19
However, being useful in the examination of biological samples, FTIR spectroscopic
imaging has several limitations, including long image acquisition times and a vast amount
of data received as a result of the analysis. Moreover, spectral analysis in some regions of
FTIR spectra is complicated as features characteristic for lipids, proteins or carbohydrates
often overlap each other [26,29,67]. In addition, spectroscopic data also contains plenty of
unused information due to difﬁculty in identifying beneﬁcial features. Therefore, additional
analysis tools are needed to determine the differences in the distribution of cartilage
chemical components after HMB supplementation. In view of these difﬁculties, principal
component analysis (PCA) and artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) were applied.
The principal component analysis is one of the most popular methods applied in
the feature extraction process [ 68]. The PCA algorithm creates new features, lower in
dimension, that project the original feature vectors into a new space. This reduction is
achieved by a linear transformation to a new set of variables, which are uncorrelated and
are ordered according to their importance in representing the original variables [68]. By
numerous applications in engineering and biology [69–71], PCA proved to be useful and
effective. In our present study, PCA supports resolving overlapping spectral features and
provides further information about the main spectroscopic features and their variation for
the set of AC samples. The results of spectral studies using PCA are shown in Figure 4A.
The score plot displays several independent or overlapping clusters, using the two ﬁrst
components based on 75 spectra of the different AC samples. Figure 4A revealed distinct
clustering of the control and HMB-supplemented groups in the SZ and DZ. There was
a clear separation between the control and HMB groups in the SZ zone, with the DZ
region overlapping with the control DZ and SZ. The DZ in the HMB-treated group was
the most decentralized from other areas of the same AC sample. On the other hand,
the PCA scores showed less separation between the control MZ and the SZ from the
HMB-supplemented group.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 8 of 19 
 
 
[66]. This finding indicates a healthy joint response in which chondrocytes detect and react 
to the changes in their mechanical environment by activating proteoglycan biosynthesis. 
However, being useful in the examination of biological samples, FTIR spectroscopic 
imaging has several limitations, including long image acquisition times and a vast amount 
of data received as a result of the analysis. Moreover, spectral analysis in some regions of 
FTIR spectra is complicated as features characteristic for lipids, proteins or carbohydrates 
often overlap each other [26,29,67]. In addition, spectroscopic data also contains plenty of 
unused information due to difficulty in identifying beneficial features. Therefore, addi-
tional analysis tools are needed to determine the differences in the distribution of cartilage 
chemical components after HMB supplementation. In view of these difficulties, principal 
component analysis (PCA) and artificial neural networks (ANNs) were applied.  
The principal component analysis is one of the most popular methods applied in the 
feature extraction process [68]. The PCA algorithm creates new features, lower in dimen-
sion, that project the original feature vectors into a new space. This reduction is achieved 
by a linear transformation to a new set of variables, which are uncorrelated and are or-
dered according to their importance in representing the original variables [68]. By numer-
ous applications in engineering and biology [69–71], PCA proved to be useful and effec-
tive. In our present study, PCA supports resolving overlapping spectral features and pro-
vides further information about the main spectroscopic features and their variation for the 
set of AC samples. The results of spectral studies using PCA are shown in Figure 4A. The 
score plot displays several independent or overlapping clusters, using the two first com-
ponents based on 75 spectra of the different AC samples. Figure 4A revealed distinct clus-
tering of the control and HMB-supplemented groups in the SZ and DZ. There was a clear 
separation between the control and HMB groups in the SZ zone, with the DZ region over-
lapping with the control DZ and SZ. The DZ  in the HMB-treated group was the most 
decentralized from other areas of the same AC sample. On the other hand, the PCA scores 
showed less separation between the control MZ and the SZ from the HMB-supplemented 
group.  
 
Figure 4. PCA score (A) and factor loading (B) plots of the first and the second principal components based on the infrared 
spectra of articular cartilages (AC) samples from the control and HMB-suppl emented group in the region of 1730–960 
cm−1. In (B), a solid red line corresponding to a typical FTIR spectrum and a dotted line to its second derivative (multiplied 
by −1) revealed the mid-infrared regions covered by factor  loadings. HMB–supplemented group, SZ–superficial zone, 
MZ–middle zone, DZ–deep zone.  
When the loading plots are observed (Figure 4B), the shape and position of PC 1 and 
PC 2 factor loadings are similar to a typical FTIR spectrum and its second derivative from 
the AC sample. Therefore, the first two compon ents, PC 1 and PC 2, which can be easily 
interpreted concerning the biochemical components of the AC tissue, were considered for 
Figure 4. PCA score (A) and factor loading (B) plots of the ﬁrst and the second principal components based on the infrared
spectra of articular cartilages (AC) samples from the control and HMB-supplemented group in the region of 1730–960 cm−1.
In (B), a solid red line corresponding to a typical FTIR spectrum and a dotted line to its second derivative (multiplied by−1)
revealed the mid-infrared regions covered by factor loadings. HMB–supplemented group, SZ–superﬁcial zone, MZ–middle
zone, DZ–deep zone.
When the loading plots are observed (Figure 4B), the shape and position of PC 1 and
PC 2 factor loadings are similar to a typical FTIR spectrum and its second derivative from
the AC sample. Therefore, the ﬁrst two components, PC 1 and PC 2, which can be easily
interpreted concerning the biochemical components of the AC tissue, were considered
for further discussion. The cumulative contribution of variance for the ﬁrst two PCs
was 80.31%, implicating that most of the information contained in the spectral matrix

=== PAGE 5 ===
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 9 of 19
has been retained (Figure 4A). The PC 1 explains 58.91% of the total variance, and it is
characterized by signiﬁcant negative loadings (absolute value of the loading >0.7) of the
aliphatic absorption bands (CH3, CH2, Table 1), the amide III and the PG-related bands.
The PC 2 explains 21.40% of the total variance. Predominantly, the amide I and II absorption
bands display large positive loadings (Figure 4B). Moreover, positive loadings at the amide
III absorption region separated control from HMB-supplemented samples. The amide I
and amide II regions are affected by the C=O, C–N and N–H vibrations characterized by
collagen and PGs. Nevertheless, since approximately 60%–80% of the solid cartilage matrix
is composed of collagen and PGs make the rest, the collagen molecules mainly dominate
this region [72].
Since the PCA method is based on the linear relationships between variables, it was
decided to apply an algorithm operating on nonlinear data processing, such as ANNs.
Artiﬁcial neural networks are considered an excellent tool in classiﬁcation and recognition
problems. Unlike classical linear modelling, they facilitate solving complex nonlinear
problems and simplify difﬁcult multidimensional spaces by presenting the issue in the form
of small-dimensional geometric relationships [73]. Moreover, ANNs can learn and are able
to generalize, have fault tolerance and the possibility of parallel data processing [73,74]. In
the presented research, two different ANNs were used: the multilayer perceptron network
(MPL) and the Kohonen network. MLP is known for its outstanding results in classiﬁcation
problems mainly due to the fact that in the learning process, the activation level of the
output neuron is transferred to the value of the output variable [ 74]. At the same time,
the Kohonen network has two basic properties that distinguish it from other networks
and make it a helpful tool for pattern detection: it is able to represent a multivariate input
vector as a one- or two-dimensional output vector and can detect groups [75].
As presented in Table 3, 100% of the cases taking part in the MLP’s training and
testing and 99% of the validation set were assigned correctly to the group. Furthermore, the
activation levels of the output neurons ranged from 0.97 to 1.00 (Supplementary Material,
Figure S5), which indicates that the network was entirely certain about the afﬁliation of
analyzed cases to the given class.
Table 3. Results of the MLP network training process.
Network
Recognition Rate Function
Training Validation Testing Error Activation (Hidden) Activation (Output)
MLP
BFGS 100 1.00 0.99 1.00 Entropy Logistic Softmax
Only one case from the validation set, which was derived from the HMB-supplemented
DZ group, was assigned incorrectly to the control DZ group (confusion matrix available in
the Supplementary Material, Table S2). Gain charts (Figure 5) constructed for examined
groups show that by taking the top 20% (shown on thex-axis) of the cases classiﬁed into the
corresponding category with the greatest certainty (maximum classiﬁcation probability),
we will correctly classify nearly 80% of all cases.
As a result of the training process (Table 4), clustering the SOM network with
25 neurons in the output zone divided the presented dataset into six groups (Figure 6). As
can be seen, neurons winning in the training created clusters based on the similarity of
given vectors describing the examined groups: control (SZ, MZ and DZ) and HMB (SZ,
MZ and DZ). It might be observed that neurons winning for the middle zone and deep
zone in the HMB group are located in the opposite corners of the square-shaped network,
indicating that SOM considered them completely different. Similar behavior may be seen
for the deep zone from the control group and the superﬁcial zone from the HMB group. By
contrast, groups such as the middle zone in the control and HMB groups are similar to a
greater extent, so they are located close to each other on the SOM map.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 10 of 19
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 10 of 19 
Figure 5. Gain charts constructed for the examined groups showing the effectiveness of a classification model calculated 
as the ratio between the results obtained with (red line) and without (blue line) the mo del. HMB—supplemented group,
SZ—superficial zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—deep zone.  
As a result of the training process (Tab le 4), clustering the SOM network with 25 
neurons in the output zone divided the presen ted dataset into six groups (Figure 6). As 
can be seen, neurons winning in the training created clusters based on the similarity of 
given vectors describing the examined grou ps: control (SZ, MZ and DZ) and HMB (SZ, 
MZ and DZ). It might be observed that neurons winning for the middle zone and deep
zone in the HMB group are located in the opposite corners of the square-shaped network, 
indicating that SOM considered them completely different. Similar behavior may be seen 
for the deep zone from the control group an d the superficial zone from the HMB group. 
By contrast, groups such as the middle zone in the control and HMB groups are similar to 
a greater extent, so they are located close to each other on the SOM map. 
Table 4. Results of the training process of SOM network with 25 output neurons.
Network QE 
(Teaching) 
QE 
(Test)
QE 
(Validation) Teaching Algorithm (Epochs) 
SOFM 196-25 0.86 1.02 0.93 Kohonen 1000 
Figure 5. Gain charts constructed for the examined groups showing the effectiveness of a classiﬁcation model calculated
as the ratio between the results obtained with (red line) and without (blue line) the model. HMB—supplemented group,
SZ—superﬁcial zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—deep zone.
Table 4. Results of the training process of SOM network with 25 output neurons.
Network QE
(Teaching)
QE
(Test)
QE
(Validation) Teaching Algorithm (Epochs)
SOFM 196-25 0.86 1.02 0.93 Kohonen 1000
A sensitivity analysis, performed to verify which wavenumbers contributed most to
the classiﬁcation (grouping) process, revealed that the ratios of the residuals’ sum of squares
of the full model to its value when the examined variable was removed from the network
were equal to or greater than one for 130 variables. The wavenumber ranges determined
by the sensitivity analysis are presented in Figure 7. It shows that the most signiﬁcant
spectral regions for the correctness of the classiﬁcation include ranges assigned to, among
others, amide I (range 1), amide II (range 2) and amide III (range 5), glycosaminoglycans
(range 4), CH2 and CH3 vibrations (range 3) and absorptions of carbohydrate moieties,
including proteoglycans (range 6). Note that the spectra regions indicated in the sensitivity
process are similar to those pointed in the analysis of PCA factor loadings, which leads to
the conclusion that mentioned ranges are a kind of the ﬁngerprint for the articular cartilage
and allow identiﬁcation of structural variations in the examined zones.

=== PAGE 6 ===
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 11 of 19
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 11 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Clusters formed by neurons winning for specified cartilage zones in the control and HMB-
supplemented group. HMB—supplem ented group, SZ—superficial zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—
deep zone. 
A sensitivity analysis, performed to verify which wavenumbers contributed most to 
the classification (grouping) process, revealed that the ratios of the residuals’ sum of 
squares of the full model to its value when the examined variable was removed from the 
network were equal to or greater than one for 130 variables. The wavenumber ranges de-
termined by the sensitivity analysis are presented in Figure 7. It shows that the most sig-
nificant spectral regions for the correctness of  the classification include ranges assigned 
to, among others, amide I (range 1), amide II (range 2) and amide III (range 5), glycosa-
minoglycans (range 4), CH2 and CH3 vibrations (range 3) and absorptions of carbohydrate 
moieties, including proteoglycans (range 6). Note that the spectra regions indicated in the 
sensitivity process are similar to those pointed in the analysis of PCA factor loadings, 
which leads to the conclusion that mentioned ranges are a kind of the fingerprint for the 
articular cartilage and allow identification of structural variations in the examined zones. 
Figure 6. Clusters formed by neurons winning for speciﬁed cartilage zones in the control and
HMB-supplemented group. HMB—supplemented group, SZ—superﬁcial zone, MZ—middle zone,
DZ—deep zone.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 12 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Wavenumber ranges indicated by the ANNs se nsitivity analysis with marked peaks in 
each (grey, vertical lines) and corresponding spectra averaged fo r each group: (range 1) 1722-1667 
cm−1; (range 2) 15981-1539 cm −1; (range 3) 1466-1400 cm −1; (range 4) 1385-1377 cm −1; (range 5) 1361-
1257 cm−1; (range 6) 1192-960 cm−1; HMB—supplemented group, SZ—superficial zone, MZ—middle 
zone, DZ—deep zone. 
3. Materials and Methods 
Articular cartilage samples were subjected to Fourier Transform Infrared microspec-
troscopy measurement. Spectra were collected from the three cartilage zones: superficial 
zone (SZ), middle zone (MZ) and deep zone (DZ). The obtained data were processed, and 
multidimensional analysis was applied to detect features that allow cartilage zones to be 
distinguished and alterations in their structure to be recognized. Additionally, AFM meas-
urements were conducted to determine the structure and mechanical properties of the 
examined regions. The experiment was approved by The Local Ethics Committee for An-
imal Experimentation of University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Poland (reference number 
2014/29) and was carried on following EU Directive 2010/63/EU. 
3.1. Sample Preparation 
Cartilage samples were harvested from 35-day old male piglets of Polish Large White 
(PLW) breed both from the control (C, n = 5) and experimental group (HMB, n = 5), which 
were fed a special diet during the fetal period. Pregnant sows received either a basal diet 
(control group) or the same diet supplemented with HMB at the dose of 0.2 g/kg of body 
weight/day (HMB group) from 70th until the 90th day of gestation. The gestation length 
did not differ between the control and HMB sows. All piglets were born by physiological 
partum, and no congenital changes were det ected. The whole experimental set is de-
scribed in detail in [18] and in  [19]. Frozen tissue material was cut on an NX50 cryostat 
(Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) into sections 7–10 μm thick (for FTIR) and 100 
μm thick (for AFM). A total of 10 samples was obtained ( n = 5 for the group) for each 
analysis (the scheme of sample distribution available in Supplementary Material, Figure 
S6). For FTIR measurements, the samples were mounted on low emissivity (low-e) micro-
scope slides (Kevley Technologies, Chesterland, OH, USA) and subjected to analysis after 
air-drying for 1 h. In the case of AFM measurements, Superfrost Plus glass slides (Thermo 
Scientific, Braunschweig, Germany) covered with double-sided adhesive tape were used. 
Samples were stored at −20 °C until investigated. 
Figure 7. Wavenumber ranges indicated by the ANNs sensitivity analysis with marked peaks in each (grey, vertical lines)
and corresponding spectra averaged for each group: (range 1) 1722-1667 cm −1; (range 2) 15981-1539 cm−1; (range 3)
1466-1400 cm−1; (range 4) 1385-1377 cm−1; (range 5) 1361-1257 cm−1; (range 6) 1192-960 cm−1; HMB—supplemented group,
SZ—superﬁcial zone, MZ—middle zone, DZ—deep zone.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 12 of 19
3. Materials and Methods
Articular cartilage samples were subjected to Fourier Transform Infrared microspec-
troscopy measurement. Spectra were collected from the three cartilage zones: superﬁcial
zone (SZ), middle zone (MZ) and deep zone (DZ). The obtained data were processed, and
multidimensional analysis was applied to detect features that allow cartilage zones to
be distinguished and alterations in their structure to be recognized. Additionally, AFM
measurements were conducted to determine the structure and mechanical properties of
the examined regions. The experiment was approved by The Local Ethics Committee for
Animal Experimentation of University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Poland (reference number
2014/29) and was carried on following EU Directive 2010/63/EU.
3.1. Sample Preparation
Cartilage samples were harvested from 35-day old male piglets of Polish Large White
(PLW) breed both from the control (C, n = 5) and experimental group (HMB, n = 5), which
were fed a special diet during the fetal period. Pregnant sows received either a basal diet
(control group) or the same diet supplemented with HMB at the dose of 0.2 g/kg of body
weight/day (HMB group) from 70th until the 90th day of gestation. The gestation length
did not differ between the control and HMB sows. All piglets were born by physiological
partum, and no congenital changes were detected. The whole experimental set is described
in detail in [18] and in [19]. Frozen tissue material was cut on an NX50 cryostat (Thermo
Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA) into sections 7–10 µm thick (for FTIR) and 100 µm thick
(for AFM). A total of 10 samples was obtained (n = 5 for the group) for each analysis (the
scheme of sample distribution available in Supplementary Material, Figure S6). For FTIR
measurements, the samples were mounted on low emissivity (low-e) microscope slides
(Kevley Technologies, Chesterland, OH, USA) and subjected to analysis after air-drying
for 1 h. In the case of AFM measurements, Superfrost Plus glass slides (Thermo Scientiﬁc,
Braunschweig, Germany) covered with double-sided adhesive tape were used. Samples
were stored at−20◦C until investigated.
3.2. Fourier Transform Infrared Microspectroscopy (FTIR Microspectroscopy) and Data
Pre-Processing
FTIR microspectroscopy measurements were performed using a Hyperion 3000 Vis–IR
microscope with a Vertex 70v spectrometer (Bruker Optik GmbH, Ettlingen, Germany)
equipped with liquid nitrogen cooled with a 64× 64 focal plane array (FPA) detector using
a globar source. For each tissue sample (n = 10) seeded on the low-e slide, the IR mapping
data were acquired in trans-reﬂectance mode using a 36× objective in the spectral range
of 4000–750 cm−1 at 4 cm−1 spectral resolution. The samples were imaged to cover a
75× 75 µm area, achieving a pixel resolution of 1.1 µm. Thus, for each pixel, the number
of scans per spectrum was equal to 64.
The resulting FTIR spectra ﬁxed in spectral imaging data were extracted and pre-
processed using a CytoSpec™ version 2.00.01 software (Cytospec Inc., Boston, MA, USA).
Before further analysis, the poor-quality spectra were removed from the dataset perform-
ing the quality test based on checking thickness, signal-to-noise ratio and enough high
maximum absorbance in the region 1800–1600 cm −1. A noise-reduction algorithm, a
second-order polynomial baseline correction and minimum–maximum normalization of
all spectra were applied to optimize the spectral data from all tissue sections. The remain-
ing spectra were cut to include only the ﬁngerprint region between 1730 and 900 cm−1.
The background spectra were collected from a pure low-e slide and subtracted automat-
ically using the same acquisition procedure as tissue samples. For each experimental
object (n = 10, 5 for the control and 5 for the experimental group) and from each carti-
lage zone, ﬁve regions of interest (ROI) with dimensions of 10 × 10 pixels, with 1 pixel
corresponding to 1.19× 1.19 µm2, were selected. The averaged FTIR spectra from those
regions were subjected to further analysis to minimize the error resulting from variations
in sample thickness.

=== PAGE 7 ===
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 13 of 19
3.3. Chemical Mapping
Chemical maps were created by integrating the area under the curve for regions giving
quantitative chemical information of the principal macromolecular components of the AC
tissue. The integrated area of the amide I absorbance (1750–1590 cm−1) has been used to
quantify the collagen content (CC), whereas the integrated area of the region that is assigned
to the PG sugar ring (1140–965 cm−1) was correlated with the PGs content (PG) [23]. The
ratio of the area of the CH2 side chain of collagen (1360–1325 cm−1) absorption to the amide
II (1590–1490 cm−1) was used to determine collagen integrity (CI). All the parameters were
collected within previously deﬁned ROIs.
Statistical analysis of calculated parameters was performed using Statistica13.1 (TIBCO
Software Inc. Palo Alto, CA, USA) and OriginPro 2016 (OriginLab Co., Northampton, MA,
USA). The resulted dataset was checked for the distribution normality by the Shapiro–Wilk
test, while the homogeneity of the variance was studied using the Levene test. Normally
distributed variables were analyzed using a two-tailed Student’st-test or t-test with Welch’s
correction when data lacked equal variances; non-parametric data were analyzed using
a Mann–Whitney U test. Data of collagen content, collagen integrity and proteoglycan
content were analyzed using the GLM MIXED procedure of SAS (SAS Institute. Inc., Cary,
NC, USA) with the dietary treatment as ﬁxed effect and pig as a random effect. Analysis
was performed separately for each histological layer of non-calciﬁed articular cartilage to
assess differences between the control (C) and supplemented (HMB) group in terms of the
parameters characterizing the structure of AC within the studied zones. For all tests, a
p-value <0.05 was established as statistically signiﬁcant.
3.4. AFM Nanoindentation
AFM measurements were taken using a NanoWizard I AFM (JPK Instruments, Berlin,
Germany) equipped with an inverse optical microscope (Axiovert 200, Carl Zeiss Mi-
croImaging GmbH, Göttingen, Germany). For the imaging and indentation measurements,
silicon nitride cantilevers (MLCT Microcantilever, Bruker, Mannheim, Germany) with a
nominal spring constant of 0.1 N/m and pyramidal tips with the nominal radius of 20 nm
were used. The actual values of the spring constant were determined using the thermal
noise method [76,77] and averaged from the three trials. All the images (in height and
vertical deﬂection domains) were taken with a slow scan rate of 1 Hz and with a resolution
of 512× 512 pixels per image. Additionally, 25× 25 force-indentation curves were recorded
for each sample. Measurements were taken for two samples from each examined group and
were conducted in a phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution. Only extracellular matrix
(ECM) was investigated within the analyzed zones, while chondrocytes with surrounding
pericellular matrix (PCM) were skipped. Young’s modulus was calculated according to a
modiﬁed Hertz model for a pyramidal indenter (Equation (1)) with the JPK Data Processing
software (v.4.2.20, JPK Instruments AG, Berlin, Germany) application. The inﬂuence of the
substrate was excluded by the reduction of the maximum indentation depth to a few per
cent (lower than 10%) of the sample thickness (force-distant curves were analyzed up to
500 nm indentation depth).
F = 2tgαE
π(1− ν2)·δ2, (1)
where: F—force required to push the tip into the sample, δ—indentation depth, α—tip
half-opening angle (17.5◦), ν—the Poisson’s ratio (0.5 for biological materials [ 61,65,78,79]).
Histograms of the stiffness distributions were calculated separately for each cartilage
zone, the maxima of which were located with OriginPro 2016 (OriginLab Co., Northampton,
MA, USA) by ﬁtting Gaussian functions or, in the case of the deep zone, a linear combination
of them [65]. Statistical differences between peaks’ values were checked by thet-Student
test (Statistica13.1, TIBCO Software Inc. Palo Alto, CA, USA) after verifying that the test
conditions were met.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 14 of 19
3.5. Data Processing
IR spectra were randomly selected with the CytoSpec™ from the FTIR images of all ten
articular cartilage samples. The 15 representative spectra were extracted from each sample
and each region (n = 45 per section) within the previously deﬁned ROI. Data were prepared
in the form of the matrix X = [x ij]d×m, the elements of which represented the values of
signal intensity (absorbance), lines (d) corresponded to subsequent observations and the
variables (m) were the values of wave numbers expressed in cm−1. Since the sampling rate
was equal to about 4 cm−1 (3.93 cm−1), 196 variables were obtained in the tested range.
Consequently, the ﬁnal spectral data set, containing 450 spectra in the spectral region of
1730–960 cm−1, was subjected to further analysis with PCA and ANNs application.
3.6. Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
The principal component analysis (PCA) was performed (Statistica13.1, TIBCO Soft-
ware Inc. Palo Alto, CA, USA) to reduce the number of variables (FTIR spectral vectors) into
a few principal components (PCs). PC scores were achieved from data sets on correlation
mode, and the variance was plotted on a 2D axis. The scree plots and the Kaiser–Guttmann
criterion were used to select an optimum number of variables. The data matrix was scaled
to the unitary standard deviation, which means that PCA was done on the correlation
matrix, and all the variables were treated on an equal footing.
3.7. Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs)
The input for artiﬁcial neural networks was a set of four hundred and ﬁfty196-element
vectors, the standardized components of which reﬂected the absorbance intensities de-
pending on the value of the wavenumber. In addition, the data matrix was randomly
divided into training, test and validation sets in the ratio of 75:15:15 and used as an input
for classifying and grouping networks.
MLP network, chosen to classify spectra into one of six groups, had one hidden
layer with 18 neurons activated with logistic function and 6 outputs activated by the
softmax function. The architecture of the classifying network was determined using the
growth method. The MLP network was trained with the Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–
Shanno (BFGS) algorithm [73] for 100 epochs, with a constant learning coefﬁcient of 0.01
and momentum of 0.80. The acceptance and rejection thresholds were 0.95 and 0.05,
respectively, corresponding to the standard classiﬁcation at the 95% conﬁdence level. As
an error function, cross-entropy (CE) was applied (Equation (2)) due to the fact that CE
implementation allows interpreting output values as the probabilities of the object group
membership [80].
ECE =−
N
∑
i=1
yi
( di
yi
)
, (2)
where: yi—real output value, di—expected output value, N—the number of teaching pairs
input-output.
Kohonen network (Self Organising Map, SOM), which aimed to group the spectra
according to their similarity, was built with 25 output neurons. As an error function,
quantization error (QE, Equation (3)) was used. QE measures the distance of the winning
neuron weight vector from the input vector, i.e., the distance of the input pattern from the
nearest center, which expresses the accuracy of mapping the input data by the winning
neuron [75]. Since QE allows assessing the neuron map ﬁtting to the input data, the
network with the lowest error value was chosen.
QE = 1
Q
TQ
∑
q=1
‖x− w‖, (3)
where: x—the input vector; w—the weight vector of the winning neuron for the x vector.

=== PAGE 8 ===
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 15 of 19
SOM network was trained with 1000 epochs according to Kohonen WTM (winner takes
most) rule (Equation (4)) [75], with decreasing learning rate (0.9–0.01) and neighborhood
(from 5 to 0).
wij (t + 1) = wij (t) + α(t)hci(t)
[
xj− wij (t)
]
, (4)
where: wij(t+1)—the element of the weight vector of the connection between the i-th
neuron and the j-th input vector in the current learning cycle; wij(t)—the element of the
weight vector of the connection between the i-th neuron and the j-th input vector in the
previous learning cycle; 0 < α(t) < 1—decreasing learning rate, hci(t)—the neighborhood
function decreasing in time with respect to the winning neuron, t—previous teaching cycle,
t+1—current teaching cycle.
For all the variables, sensitivity analysis was performed to determine the ranges that
are crucial for classiﬁcation. All the simulations were conducted in Statistica13.1 software
(TIBCO Software Inc. Palo Alto, CA, USA).
4. Conclusions
To sum up, this is the ﬁrst report combining FTIR imaging with multivariate analysis
to study the effect of the HMB supplementation on the structure and properties of articular
cartilage. Experimental results conﬁrm that Fourier transform infrared microspectroscopy
imaging has potential as a quantitative alternative to conventional methods such as histol-
ogy and biochemical analysis to characterize the articular cartilage components. Moreover,
it gives the possibility to obtain novel biochemical information from investigated samples
in a non-destructive and no staining required fashion. Quantitative FTIR mapping has
revealed both zonal- and experimental group-dependent changes within the AC tissue after
the HMB treatment, which was reﬂected in mechanical features of cartilage proved by AFM
measurements. The relatively higher amount of collagen content was localized in the super-
ﬁcial and the middle zone. At the same time, the distribution of proteoglycans signiﬁcantly
increased in the middle and deep zones compared to the untreated HMB group. These
ﬁndings were consistent with our previous works utilizing traditional biochemical assays.
Furthermore, the application of the multivariate analysis to the spectral data revealed
the existence of frequency ranges that allow for an unambiguous classiﬁcation of the
spectrum, which in the case of a heterogeneous tissue in which the boundary between
individual zones is often challenging to deﬁne, may constitute the basis for creating a
supporting method for this type of investigation. Finally, it should be underlined that only
a few studies have applied machine learning techniques based on artiﬁcial neural networks
for the analysis and processing of cartilage MIR spectral data [58]. Nevertheless, ANNs
were considered a promising tool in this type of analysis. Moreover, since their potential
implications for the cartilage condition diagnosis and monitoring were highlighted, it may
imply direction for further research.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/10
.3390/ijms22179189/s1.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, I.´S., E.T. and M.A.; Data curation, I.´S. and M.A.; Formal
analysis, I.´S., M.´S. and M.A.; Investigation, I.´S., S.M., C.P ., M.´S., K.K. and M.A.; Methodology, I.´S.,
S.M., C.P ., H.C.-S., A.A., M.B.A. and M.A.; Project administration, I. ´S.; Resources, H.C.-S., A.A.,
M.B.A., M.G. and P .D.; Supervision, E.T. and M.A.; Validation, I.´S. and T.B.; Visualization, I.´S., S.M.,
M.´S. and M.A.; Writing—original draft, I. ´S. and M.A.; Writing—review and editing, S.M., A.A. and
M.A. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The experiment was approved by The Local Ethics Commit-
tee for Animal Experimentation of University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Poland (reference number
2014/29) and was carried on following EU Directive 2010/63/EU.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 16 of 19
Data Availability Statement: Data reported in this manuscript will be available upon request.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Mauck, R.L.; Soltz, M.A.; Wang, C.C.; Wong, D.D.; Chao, P .H.; Valhmu, W.B.; Hung, C.T.; Ateshian, G.A. Functional tissue
engineering of articular cartilage through dynamic loading of chondrocyte-seeded agarose gels. J. Biomech. Eng. 2000, 122,
252–260. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Kinnunen, J.; Saarakkala, S.; Hauta-Kasari, M.; Vahimaa, P .; Jurvelin, J.S. Optical spectral reﬂectance of human articular cartilage—
Relationships with tissue structure, composition and mechanical properties. Biomed. Opt. Express 2011, 2, 1394–1402. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
3. Huber, M.; Trattnig, S.; Lintner, F. Anatomy, biochemistry, and physiology of articular cartilage.Investig. Radiol. 2000, 35, 573–580.
[CrossRef]
4. Ramakrishnan, N.; Xia, Y.; Bidthanapally, A.; Lu, M. Determination of zonal boundaries in articular cartilage using infrared
dichroism. Appl. Spectrosc. 2007, 61, 1404–1409. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Oinas, J.; Ronkainen, A.P .; Rieppo, L.; Finnilä, M.A.J.; Iivarinen, J.T.; van Weeren, P .R.; Helminen, H.J.; Brama, P .A.J.; Korhonen,
R.K.; Saarakkala, S. Composition, structure and tensile biomechanical properties of equine articular cartilage during growth and
maturation. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 11357. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Bayliss, M.T.; Venn, M.; Maroudas, A.; Ali, S.Y. Structure of proteoglycans from different layers of human articular cartilage.
Biochem. J. 1983, 209, 387–400. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Mow, V .C.; Ratcliffe, A.; Poole, A.R. Cartilage and diarthrodial joints as paradigms for hierarchical materials and structures.
Biomaterials 1992, 13, 67–97. [CrossRef]
8. van Turnhout, M.C.; Schipper, H.; Engel, B.; Buist, W.; Kranenbarg, S.; van Leeuwen, J.L. Postnatal development of collagen
structure in ovine articular cartilage. BMC Dev. Biol. 2010, 10, 62. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Hayes, A.J.; Melrose, J. Aggrecan, the Primary Weight-Bearing Cartilage Proteoglycan, Has Context-Dependent, Cell-Directive
Properties in Embryonic Development and Neurogenesis: Aggrecan Glycan Side Chain Modiﬁcations Convey Interactive
Biodiversity. Biomolecules 2020, 10, 1244. [CrossRef]
10. Fox, A.J.S.; Bedi, A.; Rodeo, S.A. The Basic Science of Articular Cartilage: Structure, Composition, and Function. Sports Health
2009, 1, 461–468. [CrossRef]
11. Huey, D.J.; Hu, J.C.; Athanasiou, K.A. Unlike Bone, Cartilage Regeneration Remains Elusive.Science 2012, 338, 917–921. [CrossRef]
12. Slater, G.J.; Jenkins, D. Beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate (HMB) supplementation and the promotion of muscle growth and
strength. Sports Med. (Auckl. N.Z.) 2000, 30, 105–116. [CrossRef]
13. Kovarik, M.; Muthny, T.; Sispera, L.; Holecek, M. Effects ofβ-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate treatment in different types of skeletal
muscle of intact and septic rats. J. Physiol. Biochem. 2010, 66, 311–319. [CrossRef]
14. Holeˇ cek, M. Beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate supplementation and skeletal muscle in healthy and muscle-wasting conditions.
J. Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 2017, 8, 529–541. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Hao, Y.; Jackson, J.R.; Wang, Y.; Edens, N.; Pereira, S.L.; Alway, S.E.β-Hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate reduces myonuclear apoptosis
during recovery from hind limb suspension-induced muscle ﬁber atrophy in aged rats. Am. J. Physiol.-Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol.
2011, 301, R701–R715. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Engelen, M.P .K.J.; Deutz, N.E.P . Isβ-hydroxy β-methylbutyrate an effective anabolic agent to improve outcome in older diseased
populations? Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 2018, 21, 207–213. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Santos-Fandila, A.; Zafra-G ómez, A.; Barranco, A.; Naval ón, A.; Rueda, R.; Ram írez, M. Quantitative determination of β-
hydroxymethylbutyrate and leucine in culture media and microdialysates from rat brain by UHPLC-tandem mass spectrometry.
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2014, 406, 2863–2872. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Blicharski, T.; Tomaszewska, E.; Dobrowolski, P .; Hułas-Stasiak, M.; Muszy ´ nski, S. A metabolite of leucine ( β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate) given to sows during pregnancy alters bone development of their newborn offspring by hormonal modulation.
PLoS ONE 2017, 12, e0179693. [CrossRef]
19. Tomaszewska, E.; Muszy ´ nski, S.; Dobrowolski, P .; Wi ˛ acek, D.; Tomczyk-Warunek, A.;´Swietlicka, I.; Pierzynowski, S.G. Maternal
HMB treatment affects bone and hyaline cartilage development in their weaned piglets via the leptin/osteoprotegerin system. J.
Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 2019, 103, 626–643. [CrossRef]
20. Szcze´ sniak, K.A.; Ostaszewski, P .; Fuller, J.C.; Ciecierska, A.; Sadkowski, T. Dietary supplementation of β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate in animals—A review. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 2015, 99, 405–417. [CrossRef]
21. Tomczyk-Warunek, A.; Blicharski, T.; Jarecki, J.; Dobrowolski, P .; Muszy ´ nski, S.; Tomaszewska, E.; Rovati, L.C. The effect of
maternal HMB supplementation on bone mechanical and geometrical properties, as well as histomorphometry and immunolocal-
ization of VEGF, TIMP2, MMP13, BMP2 in the bone and cartilage tissue of the humerus of their newborn piglets. PLoS ONE 2021,
16, e0240642. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Boskey, A.; Pleshko Camacho, N. FT-IR imaging of native and tissue-engineered bone and cartilage. Biomaterials 2007, 28,
2465–2478. [CrossRef]
23. Camacho, N.P .; West, P .; Torzilli, P .A.; Mendelsohn, R. FTIR microscopic imaging of collagen and proteoglycan in bovine cartilage.
Biopolymers 2001, 62, 1–8. [CrossRef]

=== PAGE 9 ===
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 17 of 19
24. Potter, K.; Kidder, L.H.; Levin, I.W.; Lewis, E.N.; Spencer, R.G.S. Imaging of collagen and proteoglycan in cartilage sections using
Fourier transform infrared spectral imaging. Arthritis Rheum. 2001, 44, 846–855. [CrossRef]
25. Rieppo, J.; Hyttinen, M.M.; Halmesmaki, E.; Ruotsalainen, H.; Vasara, A.; Kiviranta, I.; Jurvelin, J.S.; Helminen, H.J. Changes in
spatial collagen content and collagen network architecture in porcine articular cartilage during growth and maturation.Osteoarthr.
Cartil. 2009, 17, 448–455. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Rieppo, L.; Saarakkala, S.; Närhi, T.; Holopainen, J.; Lammi, M.; Helminen, H.J.; Jurvelin, J.S.; Rieppo, J. Quantitative analysis of
spatial proteoglycan content in articular cartilage with Fourier transform infrared imaging spectroscopy: Critical evaluation of
analysis methods and speciﬁcity of the parameters. Microsc. Res. Tech. 2010, 73, 503–512. [CrossRef]
27. Yu, C.; Zhao, B.; Li, Y.; Zang, H.; Li, L. Vibrational Spectroscopy in Assessment of Early Osteoarthritis—A Narrative Review. Int.
J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 5235. [CrossRef]
28. West, P .A.; Bostrom, M.P .; Torzilli, P .A.; Camacho, N.P . Fourier transform infrared spectral analysis of degenerative cartilage: An
infrared ﬁber optic probe and imaging study. Appl. Spectrosc. 2004, 58, 376–381. [CrossRef]
29. Rieppo, L.; Saarakkala, S.; Närhi, T.; Helminen, H.J.; Jurvelin, J.S.; Rieppo, J. Application of second derivative spectroscopy for
increasing molecular speciﬁcity of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic imaging of articular cartilage. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 2012,
20, 451–459. [CrossRef]
30. Mao, Z.-H.; Wu, Y.-C.; Zhang, X.-X.; Gao, H.; Yin, J.-H. Comparative study on identiﬁcation of healthy and osteoarthritic
articular cartilages by fourier transform infrared imaging and chemometrics methods. J. Innov. Opt. Health Sci. 2017, 10, 1650054.
[CrossRef]
31. Oinas, J.; Rieppo, L.; Finnilä, M.A.J.; Valkealahti, M.; Lehenkari, P .; Saarakkala, S. Imaging of Osteoarthritic Human Articular
Cartilage using Fourier Transform Infrared Microspectroscopy Combined with Multivariate and Univariate Analysis. Sci. Rep.
2016, 6, 30008. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Yin, J.; Xia, Y.; Xiao, Z. Comparison of macromolecular component distributions in osteoarthritic and healthy cartilages by Fourier
Transform Infrared imaging. J. Innov. Opt. Health Sci. 2013, 06, 1350048. [CrossRef]
33. Bi, X.; Yang, X.; Bostrom, M.P .G.; Camacho, N.P . Fourier transform infrared imaging spectroscopy investigations in the pathogen-
esis and repair of cartilage. Biochim. Biophys. Acta (BBA) Biomembr. 2006, 1758, 934–941. [CrossRef]
34. Kobrina, Y.; Rieppo, L.; Saarakkala, S.; Pulkkinen, H.J.; Tiitu, V .; Valonen, P .; Kiviranta, I.; Jurvelin, J.S.; Isaksson, H. Cluster
analysis of infrared spectra can differentiate intact and repaired articular cartilage. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 2013, 21, 462–469. [CrossRef]
35. Gutierrez, K.; Dicks, N.; Glanzner, W.; Agellon, L.; Bordignon, V . Efﬁcacy of the porcine species in biomedical research.Front.
Genet. 2015, 6, 293. [CrossRef]
36. Humphray, S.J.; Scott, C.E.; Clark, R.; Marron, B.; Bender, C.; Camm, N.; Davis, J.; Jenks, A.; Noon, A.; Patel, M.; et al. A high
utility integrated map of the pig genome. Genome Biol. 2007, 8, R139. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Williams, G.M.; Klisch, S.M.; Sah, R.L. Bioengineering Cartilage Growth, Maturation, and Form. Pediatric Res. 2008, 63, 527–534.
[CrossRef]
38. Tatara, M.R.; ´Sliwa, E.; Krupski, W. Prenatal programming of skeletal development in the offspring: Effects of maternal treatment
with β-hydroxy β-methylbutyrate (HMB) on femur properties in pigs at slaughter age. Bone 2007, 40, 1615–1622. [CrossRef]
39. Flummer, C.; Kristensen, N.B.; Theil, P .K. Body composition of piglets from sows fed with the leucine metabolite β-hydroxy
β-methylbutyrate in late gestation. J. Anim. Sci. 2012, 90, 442–444. [CrossRef]
40. Tomaszewska, E.; Dobrowolski, P .; Kostro, K.; Jakubczak, A.; Taszkun, I.; Jaworska-Adamu, J.;˙Zmuda, A.; Rycerz, K.; Muszy ´ nski,
S. Effect of HMB and 2-Ox administered during pregnancy on bone properties in primiparous and multiparous minks (Neivison
vison). Bull. Vet. Inst. Pulawy 2015, 59, 563–568. [CrossRef]
41. ´Swietlicka, I.; Muszy ´ nski, S.; Tomaszewska, E.; Dobrowolski, P .; Kwa´ sniewska, A.;´Swietlicki, M.; Skic, A.; Gołacki, K. Prenatally
administered HMB modiﬁes the enamel surface roughness in spiny mice offspring: An Atomic Force Microscopy study. Arch.
Oral Biol. 2016, 70, 24–31. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Tomaszewska, E.; Dobrowolski, P .;´Swietlicka, I.; Muszy ´ nski, S.; Kostro, K.; Jakubczak, A.; Taszkun, I.;˙Zmuda, A.; Rycerz, K.;
Blicharski, T.; et al. Effects of maternal treatment with β-hydroxy-β-metylbutyrate and 2-oxoglutaric acid on femur development
in offspring of minks of the standard dark brown type. J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. 2018, 102, 299–308. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Eley, H.L.; Russel, S.T.; Baxter, J.H.; Mukerji, P .; Tisdale, M.J. Signaling pathways initiated by b-hydroxy-bmethylbutyrate to
attenuate the depression of protein synthesis in skeletal muscle in response to cachectic stimuli. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.
2007, 293, 923–931. [CrossRef]
44. Eley, H.L.; Russel, S.T.; Tisdale, M.J. Mechanism of attenuation of depression of muscle protein degradation induced by tumor
necrosis factor-a and angiotensin II by b-hydroxy-bmethylbutyrate. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2008, 295, 1417–1426.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Holecek, M.; Muthny, T.; Kovarlik, M.; Sispera, L. Effect of betahydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate (HMB) on protein metabolism in
whole body and in selected tissues. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2009, 47, 255–259. [CrossRef]
46. Aversa, Z.; Bonetto, A.; Costelli, P .; Minero, V .G.; Penna, F.; Baccino, F.M.; Lucia, S.; Fanelli, F.R.; Muscaritoli, M.β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate (HMB) attenuates muscle and body weight loss in experimental cancer cachexia. Int. J. Oncol. 2011, 38, 713–720.
[PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 18 of 19
47. Wilkinson, D.J.; Hossain, T.; Hill, D.S.; Phillips, B.E.; Crossland, H.; Williams, J.; Loughna, P .; Churchward-Venne, T.A.; Breen, L.;
Phillips, S.M.; et al. Effects of leucine and its metabolite betahydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate on human skeletal muscle protein
metabolism. J. Physiol. 2013, 591, 2911–2923. [CrossRef]
48. Mao, Z.-H.; Yin, J.-H.; Zhang, X.-X.; Wang, X.; Xia, Y. Discrimination of healthy and osteoarthritic articular cartilage by Fourier
transform infrared imaging and Fishers discriminant analysis. Biomed. Opt. Express 2016, 7, 448–453. [CrossRef]
49. Yin, J.; Xia, Y.; Lu, M. Concentration proﬁles of collagen and proteoglycan in articular cartilage by Fourier transform infrared
imaging and principal component regression. Spectrochim. Acta Part A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 2012, 88, 90–96. [CrossRef]
50. Kong, J.; Yu, S. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic analysis of protein secondary structures. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin. 2007,
39, 549–559. [CrossRef]
51. Susi, H.; Byler, D.M. Resolution-enhanced fourier transform infrared spectroscopy of enzymes. In Methods in Enzymology ;
Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1986; Volume 130, pp. 290–311.
52. de Campos Vidal, B.; Mello, M.L.S. Collagen type I amide I band infrared spectroscopy. Micron 2011, 42, 283–289. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
53. Croxford, A.M.; Crombie, D.; McNaughton, D.; Holmdahl, R.; Nandakumar, K.S.; Rowley, M.J. Speciﬁc antibody protection of the
extracellular cartilage matrix against collagen antibody–induced damage. Arthritis Rheum. 2010, 62, 3374–3384. [CrossRef]
54. Shah, N.B.; Wolkers, W.F.; Morrissey, M.; Sun, W.Q.; Bischof, J.C. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy Investigation of Native
Tissue Matrix Modiﬁcations Using a Gamma Irradiation Process. Tissue Eng. Part C Methods 2008, 15, 33–40. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Xu, J.; Zhu, P .; Morris, M.D.; Ramamoorthy, A. Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy Provides Atomic-Level Insights Into the Dehydra-
tion of Cartilage. J. Phys. Chem. B 2011, 115, 9948–9954. [CrossRef]
56. Kemp, A.D.; Harding, C.C.; Cabral, W.A.; Marini, J.C.; Wallace, J.M. Effects of tissue hydration on nanoscale structural morphology
and mechanics of individual Type I collagen ﬁbrils in the Brtl mouse model of Osteogenesis Imperfecta. J. Struct. Biol. 2012, 180,
428–438. [CrossRef]
57. Rieppo, L.; Töyräs, J.; Saarakkala, S. Vibrational spectroscopy of articular cartilage. Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. 2017, 52, 249–266.
[CrossRef]
58. Linka, K.; Thüring, J.; Rieppo, L.; Aydin, R.C.; Cyron, C.J.; Kuhl, C.; Merhof, D.; Truhn, D.; Nebelung, S. Machine learning-
augmented and microspectroscopy-informed multiparametric MRI for the non-invasive prediction of articular cartilage composi-
tion. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 2021, 29, 592–602. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59. Jackson, M.; Mantsch, H.H. The use and misuse of FTIR spectroscopy in the determination of protein structure. Crit. Rev. Biochem.
Mol. Biol. 1995, 30, 95–120. [CrossRef]
60. Pogoda, K.; Pi˛ eta, E.; Roman, M.; Piergies, N.; Liberda, D.; Wróbel, T.P .; Janmey, P .A.; Paluszkiewicz, C.; Kwiatek, W.M. In search
of the correlation between nanomechanical and biomolecular properties of prostate cancer cells with different metastatic potential.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2021, 697, 108718. [CrossRef]
61. Prein, C.; Warmbold, N.; Farkas, Z.; Schieker, M.; Aszodi, A.; Clausen-Schaumann, H. Structural and mechanical properties of the
proliferative zone of the developing murine growth plate cartilage assessed by atomic force microscopy.Matrix Biol. J. Int. Soc.
Matrix Biol. 2016, 50, 1–15. [CrossRef]
62. Danalache, M.; Jacobi, L.F.; Schwitalle, M.; Hofmann, U.K. Assessment of biomechanical properties of the extracellular and
pericellular matrix and their interconnection throughout the course of osteoarthritis. J. Biomech. 2019, 97, 109409. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
63. Li, P .; Fleischhauer, L.; Nicolae, C.; Prein, C.; Farkas, Z.; Saller, M.M.; Prall, W.C.; Wagener, R.; Heilig, J.; Niehoff, A.; et al.
Mice Lacking the Matrilin Family of Extracellular Matrix Proteins Develop Mild Skeletal Abnormalities and Are Susceptible to
Age-Associated Osteoarthritis. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 666. [CrossRef]
64. Hartmann, B.; Marchi, G.; Alberton, P .; Farkas, Z.; Aszodi, A.; Roths, J.; Clausen-Schaumann, H. Early Detection of Cartilage
Degeneration: A Comparison of Histology, Fiber Bragg Grating-Based Micro-Indentation, and Atomic Force Microscopy-Based
Nano-Indentation. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7384. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Loparic, M.; Wirz, D.; Daniels, A.U.; Raiteri, R.; Vanlandingham, M.R.; Guex, G.; Martin, I.; Aebi, U.; Stolz, M. Micro- and
nanomechanical analysis of articular cartilage by indentation-type atomic force microscopy: Validation with a gel-microﬁber
composite. Biophys. J. 2010, 98, 2731–2740. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Saadat, E.; Lan, H.; Majumdar, S.; Rempel, D.M.; King, K.B. Long-term cyclical in vivoloading increases cartilage proteoglycan
content in a spatially speciﬁc manner: An infrared microspectroscopic imaging and polarized light microscopy study. Arthritis
Res. Ther. 2006, 8, R147. [CrossRef]
67. Ramakrishnan, N.; Xia, Y. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopic imaging of articular cartilage and biomaterials: A review.
Trends Appl. Spectrosc. 2013, 10, 1–23.
68. Jolliffe, I.T. Principal Component Analysis; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2002.
69. Wang, X.Z.; Yang, Y.; Li, R.; Mcguinnes, C.; Adamson, J.; Megson, I.L.; Donaldson, K. Principal component and causal analysis of
structural and acute in vitro toxicity data for nanoparticles. Nanotoxicology 2014, 8, 465–476. [CrossRef]
70. Yao, F.; Coquery, J.; Lê Cao, K.-A. Independent Principal Component Analysis for biologically meaningful dimension reduction
of large biological data sets. BMC Bioinform. 2012, 13, 1–15. [CrossRef]
71. Kinkiri, S.; Melis, W.J.C. Reducing data storage requirements for machine learning algorithms using principle component analysis.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Applied System Innovation (ICASI), Okinawa, Japan, 26–30 May 2016.

=== PAGE 10 ===
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 9189 19 of 19
72. Mow, V .C.; Guo, X.E. Mechano-electrochemical properties of articular cartilage: Their inhomogeneities and anisotropies.Annu.
Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2002, 4, 175–209. [CrossRef]
73. Bishop, C.M. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 1995.
74. Hassoun, M.H. Fundamentals of Artiﬁcial Neural Networks; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1995.
75. Kohonen, T. Self-Organizing Maps; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2001.
76. Friedrichs, J.; Legate, K.R.; Schubert, R.; Bharadwaj, M.; Werner, C.; Müller, D.J.; Benoit, M. A practical guide to quantify cell
adhesion using single-cell force spectroscopy. Methods (San Diego Calif.) 2013, 60, 169–178. [CrossRef]
77. Butt, H.J.; Jaschke, M. Calculation of thermal noise in atomic force microscopy. Nanotechnology 1995, 6, 1–7. [CrossRef]
78. Muschter, D.; Fleischhauer, L.; Taheri, S.; Schilling, A.F.; Clausen-Schaumann, H.; Grässel, S. Sensory neuropeptides are required
for bone and cartilage homeostasis in a murine destabilization-induced osteoarthritis model. Bone 2020, 133, 115181. [CrossRef]
79. Reuten, R.; Zendehroud, S.; Nicolau, M.; Fleischhauer, L.; Laitala, A.; Kiderlen, S.; Nikodemus, D.; Wullkopf, L.; Nielsen, S.R.;
McNeilly, S.; et al. Basement membrane stiffness determines metastases formation. Nat. Mater. 2021, 20, 892–903. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
80. Zhou, Y.; Wang, X.; Zhang, M.; Zhu, J.; Zheng, R.; Wu, Q. MPCE: A Maximum Probability Based Cross Entropy Loss Function for
Neural Network Classiﬁcation. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 146331–146341. [CrossRef]
R E S E A R C H Open Access
Effects of combined maternal administration with
alpha-ketoglutarate (AKG) and β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate (HMB) on prenatal programming
of skeletal properties in the offspring
Marcin R Tatara 1*, Witold Krupski 2, Barbara Tymczyna 3 and Tadeusz Studzi ński1,4
Abstract
Background: Nutritional manipulations during fetal growth may induce long-term metabolic effects in postnatal
life. The aim of the study was to test whether combined treatment of pregnant sows with alpha-ketoglutarate and
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate induces additive long-term effects on skeletal system properties in the offspring.
Methods: The study was performed on 290 pigs obtained from 24 sows divided into 4 equal groups and subjected
to experimental treatment during two weeks before delivery. The first group consisted of control sows, while the
second group received alpha-ketoglutarate. The third group was treated with β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate and the
fourth group underwent combined administration of alpha-ketoglutarate and β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate. Piglets
obtained from sows were reared until slaughter age to perform morphometric, densitometric and mechanical
analyses of femur. Serum evaluations of growth hormone, insulin-like growth factor-1, bone-specific alkaline
phosphatase and osteocalcin were performed in newborns and 90-day old piglets; additionally, plasma amino acid
concentration was measured in newborns.
Results: Maternal treatment with alpha-ketoglutarate and β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate significantly reduced
fattening time and increased birth body weight, daily body weight gain, bone weight, volumetric bone mineral
density, geometrical parameters and mechanical endurance of femur. These effects were associated with increased
serum concentrations of growth hormone, insulin-like growth factor-1, bone-specific alkaline phosphatase and
osteocalcin. Furthermore, alpha-ketoglutarate and β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate administered solely or in
combination significantly increased plasma level of 19 amino acids.
Conclusions: Hormonal and amino acid evaluations in pigs indicate additive effects of AKG and HMB on systemic
growth and development; however, determination of bone properties has not shown such phenomenon.
Keywords: Alpha-ketoglutarate,β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate, Prenatal programming, Skeletal system, Somatotrophic axis
Background
Osteoporosis is a metabolic disorder of skeletal system
characterized by low bone mass and microarchitectural
deterioration of bony tissue with consequent increased
risk of fracture. Bone mass of an individual in later adult
life depends upon the peak attained during skeletal growth
and the subsequent rate of bone loss. Higher bone mass
obtained during growth leads to lowered risk of osteo-
porosis development in the elderly, as well as following
fractures. Thus, effective osteoporosis prevention might
be aimed at increasing the peak bone mass (PBM) attained
at the time of skeletal maturity [1]. Even though evidence
suggesting that PBM is inherited, current genetic markers
are able to explain only a small proportion of the vari-
ation in individual bone mass and fracture risk [2,3].
Approximately 20-30 % of the variation in PBM is
determined by environmental factors such as nutrition
and may be modified to obtain optimal bone mineral
* Correspondence: matatar99@gazeta.pl
1Department of Animal Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Life Sciences in Lublin, ul. Akademicka 12, 20-950 Lublin, Poland
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2012 Tatara et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39

=== PAGE 11 ===
density, and morphological and mechanical properties
of skeletal system [1]. Undernutrition and other adverse
influences such as stress arising in fetal life or during
neonatal life may have long-term effects on body struc-
ture, physiology, and metabolism. Its negative effects
include disturbed amino acid and protein metabolism,
altered gene expression, reduced cell numbers, imbal-
ance between cell types, altered organ structure as well
as changes in a pattern of hormonal release and tissue
sensitivity to these hormones [4,5]. Epidemiological data
obtained in humans have shown poor intrauterine growth
and development as well as low birth weight as important
factors associated with incidence of osteoporosis, hyper-
tension, cardiovascular disease, glucose intolerance, in-
sulin resistance, type II diabetes, dyslipidemia, obesity,
schizophrenia, depression, and reproductive disorders
[5-11]. Contrary to these data, experimental studies in
animals and humans have shown that improved nutri-
tional supply during critical stages of intrauterine and
neonatal life characterized by very high sensitivity to
metabolic, hormonal and nutritional factors may induce
long-term beneficial effects on growth, development and
health status [12-17]. The mechanisms responsible for
stimulatory or inhibitory influence on development and
growth of organisms at sensitive periods of prenatal and
neonatal life, both in humans and animals, have long-
term consequences in structure and functions of cells,
tissues, organs and systems, inducing phenomenon termed
“developmental programming” [18-20].
Alpha-ketoglutarate (AKG) is a molecule determining
overall rate of the citric acid cycle. Reductive amination of
AKG in perivein hepatocytes leads to glutamate synthesis
that is converted to glutamine – conditionally essential
amino acid which serves as the precursor of non-essential
amino acids such as proline and arginine. Glutamate and
glutamine are efficient donors of amine group in amination
processes [21,22]. Both glutamine and glutamate are im-
portant sources of oxidative fuel for placenta during
pregnancy, influencing fetal development [4]. In studies
on animals, AKG administration has induced positive
effects on skeletal development and homeostasis main-
tenance [23-25]. Furthermore, administration with AKG
during neonatal life in sheep and pigs has induced bene-
ficial effects on programming of skeletal system develop-
ment in relation to bone mineral density, morphological
and mechanical properties [12,14-16].
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) is a metabolite of
an essential amino acid leucine and is produced through
metabolism of alpha-ketoisocaproate (KIC). Approximately
5 % of leucine metabolism leads to endogenous synthesis
of HMB that is converted to β-hydroxy-β-methylglutaryl
coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) [26,27]. Studies with pregnant
rats and their offspring exposed to experimental diet dur-
ing prenatal life in utero have shown nutritional ability to
program of the activity of HMG-CoA reductase – the
enzyme responsible for conversion of HMG-CoA into
mevalonate and following cholesterol synthesis [28]. β-
hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate treatment in humans subjected
to exercise resulted in increased muscle mass accretion
associated with inhibition of muscle proteolysis [29].
Studies on rats and humans have shown that dietary
supplementation with HMB solely or in combination
with arginine and glutamine results in increased colla-
gen deposition [30]. Furthermore, prenatal and neonatal
exposure of pigs and sheep to HMB treatment has induced
long-term beneficial effects on bone mineral density, as
well as morphological and mechanical properties of skel-
etal system investigated at slaughter age [14,17].
The aim of the study was to test the hypothesis that
treatment of pregnant sows during two last weeks of gesta-
tion with combined AKG and HMB may induce additive
long-term effects on development of the skeletal system of
the offspring. To achieve this aim, skeletal system proper-
ties of the offspring were investigated at slaughter age by
determination of the volumetric bone mineral density, geo-
metrical and mechanical properties of femur. Serum bone
formation markers, concentrations of growth hormone
(GH) and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), as well as
free amino acid concentrations in the plasma of the off-
spring were determined.
Methods
The experimental procedures used throughout this study
were approved by The Local Ethics Committee on Animal
Experimentation of University of Life Sciences in Lublin,
Poland.
Experimental design of the study
The study was performed on 290 newborn pigs obtained
from 24 sows of Polish Landrace (PL) breed as a result
of physiological partum. All pregnant sows were divided
into 4 groups and kept under identical breeding and en-
vironmental conditions for the whole period of experi-
ment. The first group consisted of control sows (N = 6)
treated with placebo (CaCO 3 dissolved in saline at the
daily dosage of 0.05 g/kg of body weight), while the second
group of sows (N = 6) received alpha-ketoglutaric acid
(AKG group) as a water solution buffered to neutral pH
with the use of NaOH. The third group of sows ( N =6 ;
HMB group) was treated with calcium salt of β-hydroxy-
β-methylbutyric acid (CaHMB dissolved in saline) at the
daily dosage of 0.05 g/kg of body weight. Sows (N = 6; AH
group) that underwent the combined administration
with alpha-ketoglutarate and β-hydroxy-β-methylbuty-
rate at the same dosages as in the AKG and HMB groups
belonged to the fourth group. Throughout the last two
weeks of gestation, the pregnant sows were administered
per os with placebo, AKG and HMB daily during the
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39 Page 2 of 12
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39
morning meal. During the whole period of pregnancy
and lactation all sows were fed twice a day at 0800 a.m.
and 1600 p.m. with well balanced diet supplied in equal
doses for all animals. The piglets obtained from sows
were assigned to the control group ( N = 71), AKG group
(N = 73), HMB group ( N =7 2 ) a n d A H g r o u p ( N=7 4 ) ,
accordingly with the treatment of their mothers. The
pigs included in the different groups of the study were
sired by the same boar. The body weights of the new-
born piglets were determined postpartum and blood
samples were immediately taken from the subclavian
vein of unsuckled piglets for further analysis. Mortality
of piglets (mainly due to squeezing by mothers or stress
related to blood collection) was similar in each group
and reached 10.7 % (31 piglets) in total. At the age of
three days of life, all male piglets were castrated. The
piglets from the control and experimental groups were
kept with sows until the weaning at four weeks of life.
During the whole period of the study, the piglets from
all groups had free ad libitum access to fresh water and
identical feed prepared according to the stage of the
production cycle (Table 1). At the age of approximately
6 months, the offspring obtained from sows were slaugh-
tered and left femur was isolated for further analyses.
Finally, the control, AKG, HMB and AH groups con-
sisted of 65 (36 females and 29 males), 63 (28 f and
35 m), 65 (30 f and 35 m) and 66 (32 f and 34 m) pigs,
respectively.
Blood collection and biochemical analyses in
piglets
Blood samples were collected from unsuckled and 90-days
old piglets for serum and plasma evaluations. The analyzed
samples were collected from one male and one female
form each litter, with the closest body weight values to
mean body weight of the whole litter. The obtained
samples were stored at – 25°C until biochemical ana-
lyses. Bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (BAP) activity
in serum of newborn piglets was performed with the
use of an enzyme immunoassay (METRA BAP EIA kit,
Quidel Corp., San Diego, CA, USA). The measurement
of BAP concentration in serum was performed in 90-day
old pigs using OCTEIA Ostase W BAP immunoenzymo-
metric assay (Immunodiagnostic Systems Ltd., Boldon,
Tyne and Wear, UK). Quantitative determination of osteo-
calcin in serum was performed by ELISA method (Human
Osteocalcin ELISA, Diagnostic Systems Laboratories, Inc.,
Webster, TX, USA). Growth hormone (GH) concentra-
tion in serum of piglets was assessed with the use of
Porcine Growth Hormone Enzyme-Linked Immunosor-
bant Assay – ELISA (Diagnostic Systems Laboratories,
Inc., Webster, TX, USA). Serum concentration of insulin-
like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) was determined using the
commercial immunoenzymometric assay (IEMA) for the
quantitative determination of IGF-1 in serum or plasma
(OCTEIA IGF-1, Immunodiagnostic Systems Ltd., Boldon,
Tyne and Wear, UK). The results of biochemical bone
metabolism markers and hormonal analyses were obtained
with the use of Benchmark Plus microplate spectropho-
tometer supplied with Microplate Manager Software
Version 5.2.1 (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA,
USA).
Determination of free amino acid concentration in
plasma of newborn piglets was performed with the use of
ion-exchange chromatography (INGOS AAA-400 appar-
atus for automatic analysis of amino acids, Ingos Corp.,
Prague, Czech Republic). Amino acids were separated using
analytic column OSTION LG FA 3 mm x 200 mm. For
amino acid separation five lit hium cytrate buffers (pH 2.9,
3.1, 3.35, 4.05 and 4.9, respectively) were used. The amino
acids were derivatized with ninhydrin and their identifi-
cation was performed on the basis of retention time in
comparison to the standards, using photocell combined
w i t hac o m p u t e r .T h es o f t w a r eM I K R Ov e r s i o n1 . 8 . 0w a s
used for amino acids evaluation (Ingos Corp., Prague, Czech
Republic).
Bone analysis
Left femur was isolated 24 hours after slaughter from
males ( N = 133) and females ( N = 126) and cleaned from
remaining soft tissues. Bon e length and bone weight were
measured and bone samples were kept at – 25°C until fur-
ther analyses. The volumetric bone mineral density (vBMD)
was measured using quantitative computed tomography
(QCT) technique in SOMATOM EMOTION SIEMENS
apparatus (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) equipped with
Somaris/5 VB10B software. The volumetric BMD was
determined for both the trabecular and cortical bone on
2-mm thick, cross-sectional, metaphyseal and diaphyseal
QCT scans, respectively. The trabecular bone mineral
density (Td) was assessed on measuring scan placed at
18.5 % of total femur length, proximal to the distal growth
plate. The cortical bone mineral density (Cd) was deter-
mined from the scan of diaphysis at 52 % of femur length,
measuring from the distal bone extremity.
Mechanical properties of the femur were determined
after 4 hour thawing at room temperature using three-
point bending test in INSTRON 4302 apparatus (Instron,
Canton, MA, USA) linked with a computer, registering
relationship between forces perpendicular to the longitu-
dinal axis of the bone and the resulting displacement.
The values of maximum elastic strength (Wy) and ultim-
ate strength (Wf ) of the femur were determined. The
distance between bone supports was set at 40 % of total
femur length. The measuring head loaded bone samples
with a constant speed of 20 mm/min.
Geometrical properties of the femur were determined
on the basis of measurements of horizontal and vertical
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39 Page 3 of 12
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39

=== PAGE 12 ===
Table 1 Composition of diet administered to pigs during the study
Sows 14 – 27 day
of life
28– 42 day
of life
7– 12 week
of life
13– 19 week
of life
From 20 week
of life
Ingredient
Wheat middlings (%) 35.0 47.0 45.0 40.0 30.0 25.0
Barley middlings (%) 35.0 20.0 36.0 35.5 30.0 30.0
Soybean meal (%) 15.0 18.0 10.0 17.5 15.0 10.0
Rye middlings (%) 10.5 ––– 22.0 32.5
Sauen-profi1* (%) 3.5 ––– – –
Ferkel-profi2* (%) – 4.0 4.0 4.0 ––
Josamin3* (%) – ––– 3.0 2.5
Megajoule* (%) – 5.0 2.0 2.5 ––
Cytromin duo* (%) 0.5 1.0 1.0 0.5 ––
Trilac* (%) – 5.0 2.0 –– –
Limestone (%) 0.3 ––– – –
Soybean oil (%) 0.7 ––– – –
Composition
Dry matter (%) 88.45 89.32 88.81 88.64 88.30 87.25
Crude protein (%) 16.35 19.31 15.53 17.77 16.80 15.18
ME (MJ/kg) 12.96 13.21 12.89 12.94 12.99 13.07
Crude fibre (%) 3.56 3.41 3.43 3.68 3.50 3.34
Crude fat (%) 2.35 3.06 2.29 2.37 1.66 1.68
Ash (%) 5.43 6.10 5.50 5.70 4.76 4.22
Starch (%) 45.82 40.85 46.66 43.98 46.72 49.42
Ca (%) 0.81 0.84 0.80 0.81 0.75 0.63
P (%) 0.60 0.58 0.53 0.56 0.47 0.44
Available P (%) 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.14 0.13
Na (%) 0.17 0.22 0.21 0.21 0.17 0.15
Mg (%) 0.17 0.19 0.19 0.19 0.19 0.17
Carbohydrates (%) 3.90 4.98 4.85 4.40 3.54 3.50
Lys (%) 0.91 1.31 1.04 1.20 0.99 0.83
Met (%) 0.28 0.44 0.38 0.40 0.31 0.28
Met + Cys (%) 0.59 0.78 0.69 0.74 0.63 0.57
Trp (%) 0.20 0.27 0.21 0.23 0.20 0.18
Thr (%) 0.58 0.84 0.68 0.78 0.63 0.55
Vitamin A (IE) 18,000 65,000 38,000 30,000 12,000 10,000
Vitamin D3 (IE) 1,500 7,800 4,320 3,650 1,980 1,650
Vitamin E (mg) 90 307 202 145 180 150
Vitamin C (mg) 30.0 38.0 35.0 33.0 ––
Vitamin K (mg) 2.1 2.5 2.5 2.5 1.40 1.20
Vitamin B1 (mg) 2.1 2.5 2.5 2.5 1.40 1.20
Vitamin B2 (mg) 4.4 6.5 6.5 6.5 4.24 3.52
Vitamin B6 (mg) 4.2 5.0 5.0 5.0 4.2 3.5
Vitamin B12 (μg) 14.0 38.0 35.0 35.0 35.0 30.0
1The vitamin-mineral concentrate contained per 1 kg of diet: L-lysine 6.0 %, Methionine 1.0 %, Threonine 0.5 %, Ca 20.0 %, P 7.5 %, Na 5.0 %, Mg 2.5 %, vitami nA
600,000 IU, vitamin D 3 50,000 IU, vitamin E 3,000 mg, vitanin C 1,000 mg, vitamin K 3 100 mg, vitamin B 1 90 mg, vitamin B 2 200 mg, vitamin B 6 180, vitamin B 12
1,330 μg, niacin 1,200, pantothenic acid 660 mg, folic acid 50 mg, choline chloride 15,000 mg, biotin 4,000 μg, Cu 875 mg, Zn 5,250 mg, Mn 3,000 mg, Fe
4,000 mg, J 75 mg, Co 10 mg, Se 10 mg.
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39 Page 4 of 12
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39
diameters of the mid-diaphyseal cross-section of this
bone. The values of the cross-sectional area (A), the
second moment of inertia (Ix), the mean relative wall
thickness (MRWT) and the cortical index (CI) were cal-
culated [31-33].
Lean meat content determination
The evaluation of lean meat content of carcass was per-
formed accordingly with the SEUROP grading method [34]
with the use of Capteur Gras/Maigre – Sydel (CGM) ap-
paratus (Sydel, Lorient, France). The lean meat content of
carcass was calculated automatically by the CGM appar-
atus using the following formula:
Y = 50.11930 – 0.62421X1 + 0.26979X2 where:
Y – the estimated percentage of lean meat in the carcass,
X1 – the thickness of the fat (including rind), between
the third and fourth last ribs (11th or 12th intercostal
space) at 6 cm of the dorsal midline, at a trajectory
perpendicular to the rind (in mm),
X2 – the thickness of the Longisimus dorsi muscle
(in mm), measured at the X 1 position.
Statistical analysis
All data are presented as means ± SEM. The data were
found to be normally distributed in accordance with
Kolomogorov-Smirnov test. The obtained results of the
investigated parameters of serum, plasma and femur in
females and males were compared with the use of non-
paired Student ’s t test and did not revealed sex-related
differences. Thus, the differences between the groups were
tested for statistical signif icance with the use of one-way
ANOVA. Post hoc comparisons of the differences were per-
formed using Duncan’s test. Differences showing P-value≤
0.05 were considered as statistically significant.
Results
Body weights and growth rate of pigs
Mean values of birth weight of piglets in AKG, HMB and
AH groups were significantly increased by 16 %, 23 %
and 27 %, respectively when compared to the control
group (P < 0.01). Significantly higher birth weights of pig-
lets were stated in HMB and AH groups when compared
to the AKG group (P < 0.05). Final body weight values
were significantly higher in AKG and AH groups when
compared to the control and HMB groups (P ≤ 0.01).
Fattening time of pigs to final body weight was signifi-
cantly shortened by 25, 17 and 27 days in the AKG,
HMB and AH groups when compared to the controls
(P < 0.001). Statistically significant differences of this par-
ameter were also found in AKG and AH groups when com-
pared to HMB group (P ≤ 0.001). Significantly increased
values of daily body weight gain were stated in AKG, HMB
and AH groups when compared to the controls (P ≤ 0.001).
Furthermore, statistically higher values of daily body weight
g a i nw a ss t a t e di nA K Ga n dA Hg r o u p sw h e nc o m p a r e dt o
the control pigs (P < 0.001). However, mean lean meat con-
tent was not significantly differentiated in all the investi-
gated groups (P> 0.05; Table 2).
Free amino acid concentrations in plasma of newborn
piglets
Results of free amino acid concentrations in plasma of
newborn piglets are shown in T able 3. Alpha-ketoglutarate
administration to pregnant sows has significantly increased
plasma concentration of aspartate, serine, glutamine, gly-
cine, alanine, valine, ornithine, lysine and arginine in new-
borns when compared to the control group (P < 0.05). β-
hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate administration to sows during
two weeks before the partum induced significantly higher
concentration of glutamine, glycine, valine, tyrosine in
plasma of the newborns when compared to the control
group (P < 0.05). Plasma concentration of cystine was
significantly decreased in newborn piglets assigned to
HMB group when compared to the controls (P < 0.001).
Combined administration of AKG and HMB in the AH
group of sows induced significantly higher concentration
of aspartate, threonine, serine, glutamine, proline, glycine,
citruline, valine, cystine, methionine, isoleucine, leucine,
tyrosine, phenylalanine, ornithine, lysine, histidine and ar-
ginine in blood plasma when compared to the control
newborns (P < 0.05).
Concentrations of bone metabolism markers and
hormones in serum of newborn and 90-day old piglets
Results of measurements of biochemical bone metabolism
markers and hormones in serum of newborn and 90-day
old piglets are presented in T ables 4 and 5. Serum concen-
tration of osteocalcin was not significantly different in the
experimental groups of newborns when compared to the
control piglets (P > 0.05). At the age of 90 days of life, sig-
nificantly increased serum concentration of octeocalcin
2The vitamin-mineral concentrate contained per 1 kg of diet: L-lysine 10.0 %, Methionine 3.3 %, Threonine 4.2 %, Tryptophan 0.2 %, Ca 15.0 %, P 4.0 %, Na 4. 5% ,
vitamin A 500,000 IU, vitamin D 3 50,000 IU, vitamin E 3,300 mg, vitanin C 4,000 mg, vitamin K 3 125 mg, vitamin B 1 70 mg, vitamin B 2 150 mg, vitamin B 6 130,
vitamin B 12 1,700 μg, niacin 1,700, pantothenic acid 500 mg, folic acid 40 mg, choline chloride 17,500 mg, biotin 6,000 μg, phytase 12,500 U, Cu 400 mg, Zn
1,000 mg, Mn 500 mg, Fe 800 mg, J 55 mg, Co 10 mg, Se 10 mg.
3The vitamin-mineral concentrate contained per 1 kg of diet: L-lysine 8.0 %, Methionine 2.0 %, Threonine 2.0 %, Ca 21.0 %, P 3.0 %, Na 5.0 %, Mg 2.0 %, vitami nA
400,000 IU, vitamin D 3 66,000 IU, vitamin E 6,000 mg, vitamin K 3 75 mg, vitamin B 1 70 mg, vitamin B 2 150 mg, vitamin B 6 130, vitamin B 12 1,000 μg, niacin 900,
pantothenic acid 500 mg, folic acid 40 mg, choline chloride 12,000 mg, biotin 2,500 μg, phytase 10,000 U, Cu 160 mg, Zn 660 mg, Mn 160 mg, Fe 748 mg, J
50 mg, Co 11 mg, Se 13 mg.
*Josera Erbacher GmbH & Co., Kleinheubach, Germany.
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39 Page 5 of 12
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39

=== PAGE 13 ===
was obtained in AH group when compared to the con-
trol, AKG and HMB groups (P ≤ 0.01). Bone alkaline
phosphatase activity was significantly higher in new-
borns from AKG, HMB and AH groups when compared
to the control piglets (P < 0.05). Serum concentration of
BAP in 90-day old piglets reached significantly higher
values in AKG and HMB groups when compared to the
control and AH groups (P < 0.001). Furthermore, sig-
nificantly higher concentration of BAP was stated in AH
group when compared to the controls (P = 0.05). The
mean serum GH concentration in the newborns from
the HMB and AH groups reached significantly increased
values by 55 % and 88 %, when compared to the control
group (P < 0.01). Significantly higher serum GH concen-
tration was stated in AH group of newborns when com-
pared to the AKG group (P = 0.003). At the age of 90 days
of life, serum concentration of GH was found to be higher
in AH group when compared to the piglets from AKG
group (P = 0.02). Significantly higher values of serum con-
centration of IGF-1 were found in all the experimental
groups of newborns when compared to the control piglets
(P < 0.05). Moreover, significantly higher values of IGF-1
concentration in serum were stated in AKG and AH groups
when compared to the HMB group (P < 0.05). Significantly
higher values of serum concentration of IGF-1 were stated
in all the experimental groups of 90-day old piglets when
compared to the control group (P < 0.05). Significantly
higher values of IGF-1 concentration in serum were noted
in AKG and AH groups when compared to the HMB group
(P < 0.001). Significantly higher value of serum IGF-1 con-
centration was obtained in 90-day old pigs from AH group
when compared to the AKG group (P = 0.006).
Volumetric bone mineral density, mechanical and
morphometric properties of femur in pigs at slaughter
age
Results of volumetric bone mineral density in the tra-
becular and cortical bones, morphological properties,
and mechanical properties of femur in pigs from the
control and experimental groups are presented in T able 6.
Bone weight was found to be significantly increased in all
the experimental groups when compared to the control
group (P < 0.001). Significantly increased mean value of
this parameter was stated in the AH group when com-
pared to the AKG group (P = 0.01). Length of femur
Table 3 Free amino acids concentrations (nmol/mL) in
plasma of newborn piglets from the Control group and
the groups being under prenatal influence of alpha-
ketoglutarate (AKG Group), β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate
(HMB Group) or alpha-ketoglutarate and β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate (AH Group)
Amino acid Control Group AKG Group HMB Group AH Group
(n = 12) (n = 12) (n = 12) (n = 12)
Cysteic acid 11 ± 0.3 14 ± 1 13 ± 1 12 ± 1
Taurine 207 ± 11 195 ± 17 174 ± 18 202 ± 26
Aspartate 23 ± 1 a 34 ± 3 b 28 ± 2 ab 34 ± 2 b
Threonine 213 ± 23 a 159 ± 15 a 158 ± 10 a 322 ± 26 b
Serine 210 ± 4 a 312 ± 23 b 236 ± 16 a 426 ± 20 c
Glutamate 126 ± 14 136 ± 20 99 ± 12 141 ± 15
Glutamine 217 ± 11 a 307 ± 20 b 286 ± 33 b 479 ± 21 c
Proline 198 ± 25 a 416 ± 35 b 169 ± 18 a 1045 ± 72 c
Glycine 870 ± 37 a 1420 ± 101 b 1127 ± 74 c 1474 ± 84 b
Alanine 1098 ± 62 a 1816 ± 153 b 1138 ± 55 a 1371 ± 82 a
Citrulline 68 ± 3 a 76 ± 5 a 83 ± 6 a 148 ± 9 b
Valine 266 ± 11 a 341 ± 23 b 328 ± 19 b 518 ± 24 c
Cystine 47 ± 3 a 58 ± 5 ab 27 ± 3 c 65 ± 4 b
Methionine 15 ± 2 a 26 ± 2 a 19 ± 3 a 85 ± 10 b
Isoleucine 27 ± 4 a 33 ± 4 a 19 ± 2 a 110 ± 8 b
Leucine 83 ± 10 a 96 ± 8 a 95 ± 6 a 340 ± 17 b
Tyrosine 71 ± 6 a 67 ± 5 a 108 ± 7 b 236 ± 19 c
Phenylalanine 44 ± 5 a 58 ± 4 a 48 ± 4 a 157 ± 11 b
Tryptophan 37 ± 12 17 ± 5 17 ± 8 21 ± 2
Ornithine 71 ± 4 a 104 ± 8 b 83 ± 11 ab 153 ± 14 c
Lysine 268 ± 12 a 394 ± 25 b 280 ± 24 a 655 ± 30 c
Histidine 24 ± 5 a 31 ± 3 a 42 ± 3 a 142 ± 11 b
Arginine 81 ± 5 a 121 ± 12 b 105 ± 7 ab 235 ± 21 c
Values are means ± SEM.
abcMean values that do not share common superscript letter in the same row
differ significantly for P < 0.05 as compared by multiple range Duncan ’s test.
Table 2 Body weight, fattening time, daily body weight
gain and lean meat content in piglets from the Control
group and the groups being under prenatal influence of
alpha-ketoglutarate (AKG Group), β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate (HMB Group) or alpha-ketoglutarate and
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (AH Group)
Investigated
parameter
Control
Group
AKG
Group
HMB
Group
AH
Group
(n = 65) (n = 63) (n = 65) (n = 66)
Birth weight
(g)
1315 a 1525 b 1622 c 1675 c
±4 1 ±3 1 ±3 6 ±3 9
Final body
weight (kg)
102.8 a 107.2 b 101.2 a 108.8 b
± 1.2 ± 1.4 ± 1.4 ± 1.3
Fattening time
(days)
203.8 a 178.6 b 186.8 c 177.1 b
± 2.5 ± 1.8 ± 1.7 ± 0.8
Daily body
weight gain
(g)
508.6 a 602.5 b 544.4 c 615.2 b
± 7.7 ± 8.5 ± 8.9 ± 8.2
Lean meat
content (%)
51.92 52.42 51.86 52.10
± 0.33 ± 0.41 ± 0.41 ± 0.40
Values are means ± SEM.
abcMean values that do not share common superscript letter in the same row
differ significantly for P < 0.05 as compared by multiple range Duncan ’s test.
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39 Page 6 of 12
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39
reached significantly higher value in AH group when
compared to all other groups (P ≤ 0.01). Mean value of
Td was significantly higher in HMB group when com-
pared to the control, AKG and AH groups (P < 0.001).
Furthermore, the values of Td obtained in AKG and AH
groups were significantly higher when compared to the
controls (P < 0.001). Mean value of Cd was significantly
higher in HMB group when compared to the control,
AKG and AH groups (P < 0.05). The values of Cd obtained
in AKG and AH groups were significantly higher when
compared to the control group (P < 0.001). Cross-sectional
area measured in the midshaft of femur reached signifi-
cantly higher values in all experimental groups when com-
pared to this parameter in the controls (P ≤ 0.001). Second
moment of inertia of femur reached significantly higher
values in the HMB and AH groups when compared to the
control group (P ≤ 0.01). Moreover, the comparison of this
parameter between AKG and AH groups revealed its higher
value in the piglets which were under combined prenatal
influence of AKG and HMB (P = 0.01). The determination
of MRWT and CI of femur has shown significantly higher
values of these parameters in the groups AKG and HMB
when compared to the control and AH groups (P ≤ 0.01).
Mechanical testing of femur revealed significant increase
of maximum elastic strength in all the experimental groups
Table 4 Serum concentration of biochemical markers of
bone metabolism and hormones in newborn piglets from
the Control group and the groups being under prenatal
influence of alpha-ketoglutarate (AKG Group), β-hydroxy-
β-methylbutyrate (HMB Group) or alpha-ketoglutarate
and β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (AH Group)
Investigated
parameter
Control
Group
AKG
Group
HMB
Group
AH
Group
(n = 12) (n = 12) (n = 12) (n = 12)
Osteocalcin
(ng/mL)
24.0 ab 28.5 a 23.9 ab 16.5 b
± 3.7 ± 4.2 ± 3.5 ± 3.4
Bone alkaline
phosphatase
activity (U/L)
20.9 a 28.8 b 27.9 b 26.4 b
± 1.4 ± 1.6 ± 1.3 ± 1.9
Growth
hormone
(ng/mL)
18.1 a 23.4 ab 28.0 bc 34.1 c
± 1.9 ± 2.6 ± 1.9 ± 3.2
Insulin-like
growth
factor-1 (μg/L)
49.1 a 97.9 b 73.8 c 113.2 b
± 4.8 ± 9.5 ± 2.9 ± 10.8
Values are means ± SEM.
abcMean values that do not share common superscript letter in the same row
differ significantly for P < 0.05 as compared by multiple range Duncan ’s test.
Table 5 Serum concentration of biochemical markers of
bone metabolism and hormones in 90-day old pigs from
the Control group and the groups being under prenatal
influence of alpha-ketoglutarate (AKG Group), β-hydroxy-
β-methylbutyrate (HMB Group) or alpha-ketoglutarate
and β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (AH Group)
Investigated
parameter
Control
Group
AKG
Group
HMB
Group
AH
Group
(n = 12) (n = 12) (n = 12) (n = 12)
Osteocalcin
(ng/mL)
4.8 a 3.9 a 4.4 a 5.9 b
± 0.2 ± 0.2 ± 0.2 ± 0.4
Bone alkaline
phosphatase
concentration
(μg/L)
220 a 345 b 330 b 242 c
± 4.4 ± 13.3 ± 7.1 ± 6.5
Growth hormone
(ng/mL)
3.4 ab 2.6 a 3.4 ab 4.7 b
± 0.9 ± 0.3 ± 0.5 ± 0.7
Insulin-like
growth
factor-1 (μg/L)
18.5 a 63.5 b 29.1 c 86.4 d
± 1.9 ± 3.5 ± 3.7 ± 9.4
Values are means ± SEM.
abcMean values that do not share common superscript letter in the same row
differ significantly for P < 0.05 as compared by multiple range Duncan ’s test.
Table 6 Volumetric bone mineral density, morphometric
and mechanical parameters of femur in pigs at slaughter
age from the Control group and the groups being under
prenatal influence of alpha-ketoglutarate (AKG Group), β-
hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB Group) or alpha-
ketoglutarate and β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (AH
Group)
Investigated
parameter
Control
Group
AKG
Group
HMB
Group
AH
Group
(n = 65) (n = 63) (n = 65) (n = 66)
Bone weight (g) 300.1 a 319.3 b 324.8 bc 333.7 c
± 4.1 ± 3.5 ± 3.5 ± 4.0
Bone length (mm) 197.4 a 197.7 a 196.9 a 201.0 b
± 1.0 ± 1.1 ± 1.0 ± 0.8
Trabecular bone
mineral density
(g/cm3)
1.360 a 1.414 b 1.454 c 1.410 b
± 0.005 ± 0.006 ± 0.007 ± 0.005
Cortical bone
mineral density
(g/cm3)
2.387 a 2.565 b 2.603 c 2.560 b
± 0.020 ± 0.010 ± 0.008 ± 0.009
Cross-sectional
area
(mm2)
288.3 a 312.9 b 319.5 b 320.8 b
± 6.8 ± 3.9 ± 4.9 ± 4.7
Second moment of
inertia (mm4)
17 536 a 19 065
ab
19 851
bc
21 396
c
± 716 ± 492 ± 584 ± 644
Mean relative wall
thickness
0.601 a 0.668 b 0.703 b 0.620 a
± 0.014 ± 0.012 ± 0.017 ± 0.012
Cortical index 37.16 a 39.70 b 40.78 b 37.95 a
± 0.536 ± 0.433 ± 0.578 ± 0.467
Maximum elastic
strength (N)
4066 a 4854 bc 5184 c 4644 b
± 172 ± 139 ± 170 ± 129
Ultimate strength
(N)
5377 a 5964 b 6288 b 6229 b
± 168 ± 130 ± 153 ± 169
Values are means ± SEM.
abcMean values that do not share common superscript letter in the same row
differ significantly for P < 0.05 as compared by multiple range Duncan ’s test.
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39 Page 7 of 12
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39

=== PAGE 14 ===
when compared to the controls (P ≤ 0.01). Significantly
higher values of Wy of femur was noted in the HMB group
when compared to the AH group (P = 0.01). Ultimate
strength of femur reached significantly higher values in all
experimental groups when compared to the control group
(P ≤ 0.01).
Discussion
This study has shown that prenatal administration with
AKG and HMB, individual or in combination, increases
body weight of newborn piglets. The most notable increases
of body weight at birth were seen in piglets born by sows
with combined treatment of AKG and HMB than in HMB
only group and reached 27 % and 23 %, respectively, while
this parameter was improved by only 16 % in the AKG
group. Similar effects were obtained for fattening time and
daily body weight gain. The most advantageous effects were
stated in the AKG and AH groups where fattening time
was reduced by 25 and 27 days, and the final body weight
in these groups was increased by 4.3 % and 5.8 %, respect-
ively. Even though final body w eight in pigs was not influ-
enced by prenatal administration with HMB, beneficial
effects in this group was expressed as accelerated postnatal
growth rate and improved the daily body weight gain. These
results are in accordance with previous investigations on
pig model where administration of AKG during last 24 days
of pregnancy increased body weight of newborns by 29 %
[35]. The 13 % difference between the scales of improved
body weight of newborns in both these investigations may
results form 10 day longer administration of AKG in previ-
ous studies, since the same daily dosage and form of AKG
was used. In the other report on prenatal influence of AKG
during the last 24 days of pregnancy, body weight in new-
born and 14 day old piglets was improved by 29 % and 6 %,
respectively. Unfortunately in that study, the offspring from
sows receiving AKG were sacrificed at 2 weeks of life and
constituted a short-term effect study, and so it was not pos-
sible to compare the results achieved there to our long-term
effect results [36]. Twenty-one and 24-day long neonatal
treatment of piglets with AKG at the daily dosages of 0.1
and 0.3 g/kg of body weight increased growth rate in 10-
and 21-day old females, whilst in males opposite effects
were obtained and lighter body weights were recorded at
these developmental stages. H owever, administration with
AKG has not induced long-term effects on final body
weights of the animals slaughtered at the age of 169 days of
life, indicating positive effects lasting only as long as it is
being administered [16]. Investigations on HMB adminis-
tration to sows during the last 2 weeks of pregnancy have
showed birth body weight of male and female piglets
increased by 21 % and 26 % when compared to the con-
trols. Furthermore, as the consequence of prenatal influ-
ences of HMB, the fattening time to final body weight of
the pigs was reduced by 11 days, and the body weights at
slaughter in these pigs were not different from controls in
both males and females [14]. In other studies on chicken
embryos model, in ovo administration of HMB increased
body weight of hatched and 10-day chicks by 3.3 % and
4.7 %, respectively [27]. Experiments performed on turkey
embryos have also shown positive effects of in ovo feeding
with HMB on body weight from hatch to 14 days of age
when the study was finished [ 37]. Similarly to the outcome
in our study, the only one available report on combined
treatment with AKG and HMB in growing fundectomized
pigs has not revealed additive effects of these metabolites
on final body weight that reached comparable values in
8-month old animals receiving AKG or HMB only. How-
ever, the final body weights of pigs growing over 6 months
without the fundic part of the stomach and fed AKG,
HMB or AKG and HMB per os were increased double
when compared to the fundectomized group receiving pla-
cebo [38].
Effects of prenatal administration with AKG and HMB
on systemic growth and development of piglets in postnatal
life observed in our study were associated with increased
plasma concentration of free amino acids. The most prom-
inent effects of prenatal dietary manipulations on amino
acid metabolism were observed in the group being under
combined influence of AKG and HMB. In this group, 18
amino acids such as aspartate, threonine, serine, glutamine,
proline, glycine, citrulline, valine, cystine, methionine, iso-
leucine, leucine, tyrosine, phe nylalanine, ornithine, lysine,
histidine and arginine were found to be increased in plasma
of newborns in comparison to the control group. In case
of threonine, serine, glutamine, proline, citrulline, valine,
methionine, isoleucine, leucine, phenylalanine, ornithine,
lysine, histidine and arginine, the obtained results indicate
an additive anabolic effects of AKG and HMB on amino
acid metabolism, since the amino acid plasma concentra-
tions were significantly higher than in the groups receiving
solely AKG or HMB. In the AKG group, concentrations of
10 amino acids such as aspartate, serine, glutamine, pro-
line, glycine, alanine, valine, ornithine, lysine and arginine
were elevated above the control values. Noteworthy is the
fact that in the AH and AKG groups, the final body
weights as well as daily body weight gain and fattening
time reached the most desirable characteristics. In the
HMB group, relatively moderate effects of the dietary
manipulation on plasma amino acid concentration were
observed and the level of glutamine, glycine, valine and
tyrosine was increased in comparison to the control
group. Results obtained in our study are in accordance
with the previous investigations on weaned pigs where
an enteral 6-hour continuous infusion of 930 μmol/kg/h
of AKG improved net portal absorption rate of proline,
leucine and lysine by 64 %, 49 % and 36 %, respectively.
The concentrations of all these amino acids were
increased in our study in newborn piglets being under
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39 Page 8 of 12
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39
individual or combined prenatal influence of AKG [39].
Moreover, in 17-week old turkeys, plasma concentrations
of proline and leucine were elevated by 53 % and 25 % after
14-week long oral administration with AKG at the same
dosage as in the current study [24]. Available data from
studies on growing turkeys have shown that 15-week ad-
ministration with HMB increased concentration of cysteic
acid, glutamine, valine, aspartate, glutamate, proline, ala-
nine, isoleucine, leucine and phenylalanine, whilst body
weights were not different in comparison to control birds
[40]. In studies on fundectomized pigs, HMB improved
plasma concentration of methioine, threonine, valine,
leucine, tyrosine, tryptophan and arginine, depending on
blood sampling time since last oral dosage of HMB [41].
However, simultaneous administration with AKG and
HMB improved concentration of histidine, methionine
and threonine when evaluated in plasma of fundecto-
mized 8-month old pigs subjected to 24-hour fasting
[38].
The current study also indicates that positive effects of
prenatal administration with AKG and HMB were asso-
ciated with improved somatotrophic axis function due to
increased serum levels of GH and IGF-1. In the newborns,
GH level was increased in animals being under influence
of HMB only or HMB introduced simultaneously with
AKG, while IGF-1 reached higher values in all the investi-
gated groups. In 90-day old piglets, GH was found to be
increased only in the group born by the sows receiving
combined treatment of AKG and HMB but IGF-1 concen-
tration was found to be significantly elevated in all the ex-
perimental groups. These data suggest that higher serum
concentration of IGF-1 in all the groups receiving experi-
mental treatments may results from enhanced somato-
trophic axis function and liver production of IGF-1 as well
as locally produced IGF-1 and its autocrine or paracrine
actions [42]. Recent experiments on rats performed by
Gerlinger-Romero and colleagues (2011) have shown that
chronic supplementation of HMB increases the activity of
the GH/IGF-1 axis and induces increased content of
I G F - 1m R N Ai nt h el i v e r[ 4 3 ] .I tw a ss h o w ni np r e v i o u s
studies on humans that AKG administered as ornithine
salt (OKG) in multiple trauma adult patients, who were
highly catabolic and hypermetabolic, increases plasma
levels of IGF-1 and GH by 41 % and 82 %. Similarly to
the results in this study, OKG administration in those
patients enhanced glutamine, proline and ornithine
levels by 25 %, 39 % and 234 %, respectively [44]. In chil-
dren suffering from growth retardation, 5-month long
OKG administration (15 g/day) induced growth acceler-
ation in association with increased plasma IGF-1 level.
Moreover, these effects were related to significantly higher
plasma glutamine concentration in children receiving
AKG [45]. Similarly to studies on humans, elevated levels
of GH and IGF-1 in newborn piglets from AKG-treated
sows during the last 24 days of pregnancy were stated [36].
As opposite to studies on pigs, 14-day neonatal treatment
with AKG in lambs has not induced effects on circulating
IGF-1 level. However, 4 times lower dosage of AKG was
administered to sheep than in the current study [12].
Investigations on animals with maternal and neonatal
administration of HMB have also shown improved soma-
totrophic axis function. HMB treatment in pregnant sows
for 2 weeks before the partum increased serum GH and
IGF-1 levels by 38 % and 20 % in the offspring [14]. In
lambs, oral administration with HMB during the first
21 days of life also increased GH and IGF-1 concentra-
tion by 70 % as determined at 3 weeks of life, while at
the age of 130 days of life both these hormones reached
similar values to those in controls [17]. Thus, it may be
postulated that prenatal treatment with HMB may in-
duce long-term effects on secretive function of the
somatotrophic axis, while neonatal or postnatal admin-
istration improves temporary its function and brings
short-term effects.
Next to the observed beneficial effects of prenatal influ-
ences of AKG and HMB on increased growth rate of pigs
and hormonal and amino acid status, this study demon-
strated improved morphometric, densitometric and mech-
anical properties of bones after the experimental treatments.
Both these metabolites induced individually or in combin-
ation long-term anabolic effects on bone tissue metabolism
which were expressed as increased values of bone formation
marker – BAP in newborn and 90-day old piglets. Increased
serum concentration of OC in 90-day old pigs in the AH
group also confirmed continuous acceleration of bone for-
mation processes resulting from the performed dietary ma-
nipulation in pregnant sows. However, the observed in this
study difference of serum OC concentration between AKG
and AH groups of newborns need further investigation to
be explained. Among morphological traits, weight of
femur was improved in all the experimental groups and
the most readable effects were induced after exclusive or
combined administration with HMB, while bone length
was improved by nearly 2 % in case of the combined treat-
ment. Improved weight of femur may results from both
the observed increased vBMD and bone geometry. It is
noteworthy that cross-sectional area was enhanced in all
the experimental groups, while second moment of inertia
reached higher values in the HMB and AH groups. As the
result of improved periosteal and endoosteal bone depos-
ition, MRWT and CI of femur were higher after exclusive
treatment with AKG or HMB. Prenatal treatment with
AKG and HMB increased also vBMD within both cancel-
lous and compact compartments in all the experimental
groups. It is surprising that the highest values of Td and
Cd were stated in animals receiving HMB only, and the
additive effect of AKG and HMB on bone mineralization
was not induced. Evaluation of mechanical endurance of
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39 Page 9 of 12
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39

=== PAGE 15 ===
femur has not revealed additive effects of AKG and
HMB; however, improved maximum elastic strength and
ultimate strength were observed in all the experimental
groups. The improved mechanical characteristic of femur
observed in all the experimental groups seems to be result
of improved bone geometry and vBMD since both these
factors determine bone rigidity and mechanical endurance
to acting forces [46-48]. The observed anabolic effects of
A K Ga n dH M Bo ns k e l e t o ni nt h ec u r r e n ts t u d ya r ei n
accordance to the results obtained on the fundectomized
pig model, where severe osteopenia development of femur
and tibia was inhibited by a 6-month administration with
these metabolites. In AKG-treated animals, significant
increase of weight, length, bone mineral density (BMD),
bone mineral content (BMC), cross-sectional area, second
moment of inertia, mean relative wall thickness, cortical
index, maximum elastic strength and ultimate strength of
the bones was associated with improved serum concen-
tration of IGF-1 and serum BAP activity when compared
to the fundectomized group [49]. Results of long bone
analysis in slaughter pigs treated during 21 and 24 days
of neonatal life with AKG revealed its positive effects on
length, Cd, Wy, Wf and Young ’sm o d u l u st h a tw a sc o n -
nected with elevated plasma estrogens level [16]. In
studies on growing turkeys, 14-week long administration
with AKG eliminated neurectomy-induced osteopenia of
radius increasing its weight, vBMD, A, Ix, MRWT, Wy
and Wf. These advantageous effects were combined with
higher serum concentration of proline and leucine in
comparison to placebo-treate d birds [24]. In other stud-
ies on sheep, two week long neonatal treatment with
AKG improved Td, Cd and Wf of femur as well as in-
creasing weight, length, Cd, Wy and the moments of
maximum elastic strength and ultimate strength [12,15].
Furthermore, it was shown that 7-week administration
with OKG in growing female turkeys induces higher Td,
Cd, Wy and Wf of tibia without any changes of bone
geometry. However, increased synthesis of aspartate, pro-
line, alanine, valine, leucine, isoleucine and ornithine was
postulated to be responsible for enhanced skeletal proper-
ties [50]. Using fendectomized pig model, it was revealed
that HMB inhibits fundectomy-induced osteopenia in axial
skeleton (lumbar vertebrae) improving weight, total vol-
ume, mean vBMD, Td, calcium hydroxyapatite density of
trabecular and cortical bone, BMD, BMC, ultimate force,
ultimate stress, Young’s modulus, stiffness and work to the
ultimate force point. Together with the beneficial influence
of HMB on bone tissue and skeletal characteristic, the
improved synthesis of threonine, glycine, alanine, valine,
methionine, leucine, tyrosine, tryptophan and arginine was
observed, confirming importance of amino acid metabol-
ism for bone formation and skeletal homeostasis mainten-
ance [41]. In studies on growing meat-type male turkeys,
HMB administration from 6 to 20 week of life positively
influenced geometry, vBMD and mechanical endurance of
tibia. It was shown that improved Td, Cd, A, Ix, Wy and
Wf of tibia was related to higher plasma concentration of
cysteic acid, aspartate, glutamate, alanine, valine, leucine,
isoleucine and phenylalanine [39]. Unfortunately, the com-
parison of the bone properties determined in this study on
pigs from the AH group is not possible with other experi-
mental data, since effects of combined treatment with
AKG and HMB on bone tissue metabolism and skeletal
system were not previously studied, either in animals or in
humans.
Considering the results obtained in the current study,
it should be emphasized that prenatal dietary manipula-
tion with AKG and HMB influenced systemic development
of pigs stimulating different physiological mechanism. It
may be postulated that increased birth and final body
weight, as well as accelerated systemic growth and develop-
ment of pigs were induced via stimulated secretory func-
tion of the somatotrophic axis by AKG and HMB. This
hypothesis is supported by the data showing that endocrine
gland function can be programmed in utero at critical peri-
ods of prenatal development with metabolic pre-partum
and post-partum consequences on the cellular, tissue and
system levels [9]. It may be proposed that the improved
skeletal properties in AKG and/or HMB treated animals re-
sult from positive prenatal programming of the somato-
trophic axis, especially when one considers decisive role of
GH and IGF-1 for skeletal growth, osteoblasts function,
bone mineralization and calcium-phosphate homeostasis
maintenance [51]. The other mechanism positively influen-
cing prenatal development of piglets, their birth and final
body weight, as well as daily body weight gain and bone tis-
sue properties may result from improved amino acid me-
tabolism. It must be underlined that plasma glutamine
concentration was increased in newborns from all the ex-
perimental groups. Besides its building function in protein
and polypeptides structures, glutamine - being a functional
amino acid - determines key metabolic pathways necessary
to provide optimal growth rate and immunity. It maximizes
efficiency of feed utilization, enhances protein accretion
and improves health status influencing effectives in animal
production. Furthermore, glutamine, as the most abundant
alpha-amino acid in skeletal muscles, regulates nutrient
metabolism, gene expression and protein synthesis – the
main factors influencing muscle mass and body weight
[52]. Improved metabolism of glutamine would also pro-
vide benefit for skeletal formation, especially when one
considers its role as the main substrate for synthesis of
proline – the amino acid undergoing hydroxylation process
to form hydroxyproline. Both proline and hydroxyproline
are considered as integral constituents of collagen helix
and its protectors against proteases. While proline and
hydroxyproline contribute to two-thirds of the collagen
structure, one-third is ascribed to glycine [53]. Except for
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39 Page 10 of 12
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39
proline concentration in the HMB group of newborns,
both proline and glycine were increased in all the experi-
mental groups. Thus, AKG- and HMB induced increase of
the amount of collagen in bones of the newborns from
experimental groups would provide steady advantage in
bone mass of the skeleton maintained or increased dur-
ing postnatal growth and development in relation to
control animals. It can not be excluded that higher muscle
mass since birth of piglets has also induced positive effects
on skeleton through higher lif e-long tension and biomech-
anical stimulation of bones and their positive response in
terms of enhanced mineralization, morphological traits and
mechanical endurance. Better muscle function resulting
from direct and indirect influences of the other amino acids
(mostly leucine, isoleucine, valine, arginine and methionine)
increased in AKG- and HMB-tr eated piglets would also be
effective in relation to improved muscle-bone interactions
[54]. Due to observed higher body weights since birth in all
the experimental groups of pigs than in the control ani-
mals, positive effects in bon es may results partially from
heavier skeletal loading, sin ce adaptive response of bone
tissue to loading increases bone mass, size and mineral
density [55,56].
In response to the question whether additive effects of
maternal treatment with AKG and HMB on prenatal pro-
gramming of growth, development and bone tissue metab-
olism exist, which arises from the current study, the
complete explanation of this issue seems to be difficult. It
must be underlined that in the AH group, the highest
plasma concentration of 16 amino acids such as threonine,
serine, glutamine, proline, citruline, valine, cysteine, me-
thionine, isoleucine, leucine, tyrosine, phenylalanine, or-
nithine, lysine, histidine and arginine in comparison to
all other groups indicates on additive effects of these
metabolites in relation to prenatal programming of growth,
development and bone tissue metabolism. The observed
secretive response of the somatotrophic axis to combined
maternal treatment with AKG and HMB and the highest
concentration of GH and IGF-1 in the AH group confirm
additive effects of these metabolites in relation to systemic
growth and development. However, except for bone length,
the evaluation of systemic growth parameters and bone
properties in pigs at slaughter age has not shown additive
effects of prenatal AKG and HMB application.
Abbreviations
PBM: Peak bone mass; AKG: Alpha-ketoglutarate; HMB: β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate; KIC: Alpha-ketoisocaproate; HMG-CoA: β-hydroxy-β-
methylglutaryl coenzyme A; GH: growth hormone; IGF-1: Insulin-like growth
factor-1; BAP: Bone-specific alkaline phosphatase; OC: Osteocalcin;
vBMD: Volumetric bone mineral density; QCT: Quantitative computed
tomography; Td: Trabecular bone mineral density; Cd: Cortical bone mineral
density; Wy: Maximum elastic strength; Wf: Ultimate strength; A: Cross-
sectional area; Ix: Second moment of inertia; MRWT: Mean relative wall
thickness; CI: Cortical index; OKG: Ornithine alpha-ketoglutarate; BMD: Bone
mineral density; BMC: Bone mineral content.
Competing interests
The authors of the manuscript have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by Grant No 2 P06Z 012 29 from The Polish
Ministry of Education and Science.
Author details
1Department of Animal Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University
of Life Sciences in Lublin, ul. Akademicka 12, 20-950 Lublin, Poland. 2II
Department of Radiology, Medical University of Lublin, ul. Staszica 16, 20-081
Lublin, Poland. 3Department of Conservative Dentistry and Endodontics,
Medical University of Lublin, ul. Karmelicka 7, 20-081 Lublin, Poland.
4Department of Animal Physiology, Studium Generale Sandomiriense, ul.
Krakowska 26, 27-600 Sandomierz, Poland.
Authors’ contributions
MT, as the principal investigator, was responsible for the concept and
experimental design of the study and supervised all stages of the
experiment. MT was also responsible for conducting all of the experimental
procedures with animals, sample collection, morphometric analysis of bones,
biochemical evaluation of plasma and serum and statistical analysis. WK was
responsible for radiological evaluation of femur with the use of quantitative
computed tomography technique. BT participated in statistical evaluation of
data and biochemical analyses. TS participated in the design of the study
and supervised mechanical testing of bones. All authors participated in the
preparation of, and have approved the final version of the manuscript.
Received: 21 February 2012 Accepted: 11 May 2012
Published: 11 May 2012
References
1. Eastell R, Lambert H: Diet and healthy bones. Calcif Tissue Int 2002,
70:400–404.
2. Cooper C, Walker-Bone K, Arden N, Dennison E: Novel insights into the
pathogenesis of osteoporosis: the role of intrauterine programming.
Rheumatology 2000, 39:1312–1315.
3. Ralston S: Do genetic markers aid in risk assessment? Osteoporosis Int
1998, 8(Suppl. 1):S37 –S42.
4. Battaglia FC, Regnault TRH: Placental transport and metabolism of amino
acids. Placenta 2001, 22:145–161.
5. Cooper C, Javaid MK, Taylor P, Walker-Bone K, Dennison E, Arden N: The
fetal origin of osteoporotic fracture. Calcif Tissue Int 2002, 70:391–394.
6. Cooper C, Fall C, Egger P, Hobbs R, Eastell R, Barker D: Growth in infancy
and bone mass in later life. Ann Rheum Dis 1997, 56:17–21.
7. Fall C, Hindmarsh P, Dennison E, Kellingray S, Barker D, Cooper C:
Programming of growth hormone secretion and bone mineral density in
elderly men: a hypothesis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998, 83:135–139.
8. Cooper C, Javaid K, Westlake S, Harvey N, Dennison E: Developmental
origins of osteoporotic fracture: The role of maternal vitamin D
insufficiency. J Nutr 2005, 135:2728S–2734S.
9. Fowden AL, Giussani DA, Forhead AJ: Endocrine and metabolic
programming during intrauterine development. Early Hum Dev 2005,
81:723–734.
10. Ozanne SE, Fernandez-Twinn D, Hales CN: Fetal growth and adult diseases.
Semin Perinatol 2004, 28:81–87.
11. Specker B: Nutrition influences bone development from infancy through
toddler years. J Nutr 2004, 134:6910S–6915S.
12. Harrison AP, Tygesen MP, Sawa-Wojtanowicz B, Husted S, Tatara MR:
α-Ketoglutarate treatment early in postnatal life improves bone
density in lambs at slaughter. Bone 2004, 35:204–209.
13. Javaid MK, Crozier SR, Harvey NC, Gale CR, Dennison EM, Boucher BJ, Arden
NK, Godfrey KM, Cooper C: Maternal vitamin D status during pregnancy
and childhood bone mass at age 9 years: A longitudinal study. Lancet
2006, 367:36–43.
14. Tatara MR, Śliwa E, Krupski W: Prenatal programming of skeletal
development in the offspring: ef fects of maternal treatment with
β-hydroxy- β-methylbutyrate (HMB) on femur properties in pigs at
slaughter age. Bone 2007, 40:1615–1622.
15. Tatara MR, Tygesen MP, Sawa-Wojtanowicz B, Krupski W, Majcher P, Harrison
AP: Bone development: the effect of short term alpha-ketoglutarate
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39 Page 11 of 12
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39

=== PAGE 16 ===
administration on long term mechanical properties of ribs in ram lambs.
Small Rum Res 2007, 67:179–183.
16. Andersen NK, Tatara MR, Krupski W, Majcher P, Harrison AP: The long-term
effect of α-ketoglutarate, given early in postnatal life, on both growth
and various bone parameters in pigs. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 2008,
92:519–528.
17. Tatara MR: Neonatal programming of skeletal development in sheep is
mediated by somatotrophic axis function. Exp Physiol 2008, 93:763–772.
18. Fowden AL, Forhead AJ: Endocrine mechanisms of intrauterine
programming. Reproduction 2004, 127:515–526.
19. Ross MG, Desai M: Gestational programming: Population survival effects
of drought and famine during pregnancy. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp
Physiol 2005, 288:R25–R33.
20. Demmelmair H, von Rosen H, Koletzko B: Long-term consequences of
early nutrition. Early Hum Dev 2006, 82:567–574.
21. Stoll B, McNelly S, Buscher H-P, Haussinger D: Functional hepatocyte
heterogeneity in glutamate, aspartate and α-ketoglutarate uptake: A
histoautoradiographical study. Hepatology 1991, 13:247–253.
22. Fläring UB, Rooyackers OE, Wernerman J, Hammarqvist F: Glutamine
attenuates post-traumatic glutathione depletion in human muscle. Clin
Sci 2003, 104:275–282.
23. Kowalik S, Śliwa E, Tatara MR, Krupski W, Majcher P, Studzi ński T: Influence
of alpha-ketoglutarate on mineral density and geometrical and
mechanical parameters of femora during postnatal life in piglets. Bull Vet
Inst Pulawy 2005, 49:107–111.
24. Tatara MR, Brodzki A, Krupski W, Śliwa E, Silmanowicz P, Majcher P,
Pierzynowski SG, Studzi ński T: Effects of α-ketoglutarate on bone
homeostasis and plasma amino acids in turkeys. Poult Sci 2005,
84:1604–1609.
25. Tatara MR, Silmanowicz P, Majcher P, Krupski W, Studzi ński T: Influence of
alpha-ketoglutarate on cortical bone atrophy after denervation of the
humerus in turkey. Bull Vet Inst Pulawy 2005, 49:113–116.
26. Nissen S, Abumrad NN: Nutritional role of the leucine metabolite
β-hydroxy- β-methylbutyrate (HMB). JN u t rB i o c h e m1997, 8:300–311.
27. Tako E, Ferket PR, Uni Z: Effects of in ovo feeding of carbohydrates and
β-hydroxy- β-methylbutyrate on the development of chicken intestine.
Poult Sci 2004, 83:2023–2028.
28. Brown SA, Rogers LK, Dunn JK, Gotto AM Jr, Patsch W: Development of
cholesterol hemostatic memory in the rats is influenced by maternal
diets. Metabolism 1990, 39:468–473.
29. Nissen S, Sharp R, Ray M, Rathmacher JA, Rice D, Fuller JC Jr, Connelly AS,
Abumrad N: Effect of leucine metabolite β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate on
muscle metabolism during resistance-exercise training. J Appl Physiol
1996, 81:2095–2104.
30. Williams J, Abumrad N, Barbul A: Effect of a specialized amino acid
mixture on human collagen deposition. Ann Surg 2002, 236:369–375.
31. Ferretti JL, Capozza RF, Mondelo N, Montuori E, Zanchetta JR:
Determination of femur structural properties by geometric and material
variables as a function of body weight in rats. Evidence of sexual
dimorphism. Bone 1993, 14:265–270.
32. Ferretti JL, Capozza RF, Mondelo N, Zanchetta JR: Interrelationships
between densitometric, geometric and mechanical properties of rat
femora: inferences concerning mechanical regulation of bone modelling.
J Bone Miner Res 1993, 8:1389–1395.
33. Tatara MR, Krupski W, Majcher P, Studzi ński T: Long-term denervation of
the humerus in turkeys as an experimental model for osteopenia. Poult
Sci 2005, 84:718–722.
34. The Commission of the European Communities: Commission decision of
11 March 2005 authorizing methods for grading pigs` carcasses in
Poland. Off J Europ Union Pl 2005, L74:62–65.
35. Śliwa E, Kowalik S, Tatara MR, Krupski W, Majcher P, Łuszczewska-Sierakowska
I, Pierzynowski SG, Studzi ński T: Effect of alpha-ketoglutarate given to
pregnant sows on the development of the humerus and femur in
newborns. Bull Vet Inst Pulawy 2005, 49:117–120.
36. Śliwa E, Wawrzyniak-Gacek A, Tatara MR, Kowalik S, Łuszczewska-Sierakowska
I, Krupski W, Majcher P, Pierzynowski SG, Studzi ński T: Influence of
dexamethasone and alpha-ketoglutarate on growth and development of
the skeletal system of pigs. Medycyna Wet 2005, 61:526–531.
37. Foye OT, Ferket PR, Uni Z: The effects of in ovo feeding arginine,
beta-hydroxy-beta-methyl-butyrate, and protein on jejunal digestive and
absorptive activity in embryonic and neonatal turkey poults. Poult Sci
2007, 86:2343–2349.
38. Sliwa E, Adaszek L, Tatara M, Dobrowolski P: Short- and long-term
consequences on biochemical markers after fundectomy in pigs
supplemented with 3-hydroxy-3-methylbutyrate and alpha-ketoglutarate.
Berl Munch Tierarztl Wochenschr 2010, 123:397–405.
39. Lambert BD, Filip R, Stoll B, Junghans P, Derno M, Hennig U, Souffrant WB,
Pierzynowski S, Burrin DG: First-pass metabolism limits the intestinal
absorption of enteral alpha-ketoglutarate in young pigs. J Nutr 2006,
136:2779–2784.
40. Tatara MR: Effect of β-hydroxy- β-methylbutyrate (HMB) administration
on volumetric bone mineral density, and morphometric and
mechanical properties of tibia in male turkeys. JA n i mP h y s i o lA n i mN u t r
2009, 93:669–677.
41. Tatara MR, Sliwa E, Krupski W, Worzakowska M: 3-Hydroxy-3-methylbutyrate
administration diminishes fundectomy-induced osteopenia of the
lumbar spine in pigs. Nutrition 2008, 7– 8:753–760.
42. Sjogren K, Liu JL, Blad K, Skrtic S, Vidal O, Wallenius V, LeRoith D, Tornell J,
Isaksson OGP, Jansson JO, Ohlsson C: Liver-derived insulin-like growth
factor I (IGF-I) is the principal source of IGF-I in blood but is not required
for postnatal body growth in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1999, 96:7088–7092.
43. Gerlinger-Romero F, Guimarães-Ferreira L, Giannocco G, Nunes MT: Chronic
supplementation of beta-hydroxy-beta methylbutyrate (HMB) increases
the activity of the GH/IGF-I axis and induces hyperinsulinemia in rats.
Growth Horm IGF Res 2011, 21:57–62.
44. Jeevanandam M, Petersen SR: Substrate fuel kinetics in enterally fed
traumapatients supplemented with ornithine alpha ketoglutarate. Clin
Nutr 1999, 18:209–217.
45. Moukarzel AA, Goulet O, Salas JS, Marti-Henneberg C, Buchman AL,
Cynober L, Rappaport R, Ricour C: Growth retardation in children
receiving long-term total parente ral nutrition: effects of ornithine
alpha-ketoglutarate. Am J Clin Nutr 1994, 60:408–413.
46. Krupski W, Tatara MR: Interrelationships between densitometric,
morphometric, and mechanical properties of the tibia in turkeys. Bull Vet
Inst Pulawy 2007, 51:621–626.
47. Tatara MR, Śliwa E, Krupski W, Worzakowska M, Studzi ński T:
Interrelationships between morphometric, densitometric and mechanical
properties of lumbar vertebrae in pig. JPCCR 2007, 2:165–170.
48. Tatara MR, Krupski W, Tymczyna B, Majcher P, Rosenbeiger P, Niedziela D:
Interrelationships between densitometric, morphometric, and
mechanical properties of the femur in male polish merino sheep. Bull Vet
Inst Pulawy 2011, 55:795–799.
49. Śliwa E: 2-Oxoglutaric acid administration diminishes fundectomy-induced
osteopenia in pigs. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr 2010, 94:e86–e95.
50. Tatara MR, Śliwa E, Krupski W, Brodzki A, Pasternak K: Ornithine
alpha-ketoglutarate increases mineralization and mechanical
properties of tibia in turkeys. Bone 2006, 39:100–105.
51. Rizzoli R, Bonjour J-P, Ferrari SL: Osteoporosis, genetics and hormones. J
Mol Endocrinol 2001, 26:79–94.
52. Wu G: Amino acids: metabolism, functions, and nutrition. Amino Acids
2009, 37:1–17.
53. Rodwell VW: Metabolism of proteins and amino acids .I n Harper’s Illustrated
Biochemistry. Edited by Murray RK, Granner DK, Mayes PA, Rodwell VW.
Lange: Stamford; 2003:237 –285.
54. Ferretti JL, Cointry GR, Capozza RF, Frost HM: Bone mass, bone strength,
muscle-bone interactions, osteopenias and osteoporoses. Mech Ageing
Dev 2003, 124:269–279.
55. Warden SJ: Breaking the rules for bone adaptation to mechanical
loading. J Appl Physiol 2006, 100:1441–1442.
56. Kuruvilla SJ, Fox SD, Cullen DM, Akhter MP: Site specific bone adaptation
response to mechanical loading. J Musculoskelet Neuronal Interact 2008,
8:71–78.
doi:10.1186/1743-7075-9-39
Cite this article as: Tatara et al. : Effects of combined maternal
administration with alpha-ketoglutarate (AKG) and β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate (HMB) on prenatal programming of skeletal properties
in the offspring. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012 9:39.
Tatara et al. Nutrition & Metabolism 2012, 9:39 Page 12 of 12
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/39
Ann. Anim. Sci., Vol. 20, No. 3 (2020) 899–917         DOI: 10.2478/aoas-2020-0026
Regulation of folliculogenesis by gRowth factoRs  
in piglet ov aRy exposed pRenatally  
to β-hydRoxy-β-methylbutyRate (hmb)*  *
Monika Hułas-Stasiak1♦, Joanna Jakubowicz-Gil1, Piotr Dobrowolski1, Małgorzata Grzesiak2,  
Siemowit Muszyński3, Małgorzata Świątkiewicz4, Ewa Tomaszewska5
1Department of Functional Anatomy and Cytobiology, Maria Curie-Sklodowska University,  
Akademicka 19, 20-033 Lublin, Poland 
2Department of Endocrinology, Institute of Zoology and Biomedical Research,  
Jagiellonian University in Krakow, Gronostajowa 9, 30-387 Kraków, Poland
 3Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Environmental Biology, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, 
Akademicka 13, 20-950 Lublin, Poland
4Department of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, National Research Institute of Animal Production, 
32-083 Balice n. Kraków, Poland 
5Department of Animal Physiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Life Sciences  
in Lublin, Akademicka 12, 20-950 Lublin, Poland
♦Corresponding author: monhul@o2.pl
abstract
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) is one of the leucine metabolites with protein anabolic effects 
which makes it very popular among athletes. Previously, it was shown that HMB administered 
during the prenatal period reduced the pool of primordial follicles and increased the proportion 
of developing follicles in newborn piglets. This work is a further step to understand these mor -
phological alterations. Therefore, the aim of this study was to examine the effect of prenatal HMB 
treatment on the expression of the Kit ligand, BMP-4, bFGF, and the IGF-1/IGF-1R system which 
are the main growth factors controlling follicular development. Excised ovaries from 12 newborn 
piglets, originated from the control (n=6) and HMB-treated (n=6) sows were used for immunohis-
tochemical and western-blot analysis. The tested proteins were localized within egg nests and ovar-
ian follicles. Furthermore, the western-blot assay indicated higher BMP-4, Kit ligand, and IGF-1R 
expression, while the level of bFGF and IGF-1 proteins decreased after HMB dietary treatment. 
These findings show that HMB included into sow diet can modulate the expression of growth fac -
tors and thereby alter ovarian morphology in offspring. Therefore, this study opens a discussion 
about the benefits and risks of the diet supplemented with HMB and its potential application in 
medicine and animal husbandry, and further research is necessary in this area.
Key words: β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate, folliculogenesis, piglets, growth factors
*This research was funded by National Science Centre (NCN, Poland), grant number 2017/01/X/
NZ3/01055.

=== PAGE 17 ===
M. Hułas-Stasiak et al. 
900
In recent years, it has become very popular to use dietary supplements. One 
of them is β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB), which is a metabolite of leucine. 
HMB is considered an ergogenic substance that is a source of energy for muscles 
increasing their efficiency (Wilson et al., 2008, 2013). The studies on the effect of 
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate on foetal development are of particular interest. HMB 
administered to pregnant females increased the birth weight of piglets (Blicharski 
et al., 2017; Tatara et al., 2007), improved their health condition (Flummer et al., 
2012), and stimulated the development of the musculoskeletal system (Blicharski et 
al., 2017; Tatara et al., 2007; Wan et al., 2016 a, b, 2017). All these beneficial effects 
give hope for the potential use of HMB in prenatal medicine. HMB could be used in 
mothers at risk of premature delivery or to prevent IUGR (intrauterine foetal growth 
inhibition), which would accelerate the growth and maturation of the foetus and 
increase his chances of survival (Cieślak and Nieradka-Iwanicka, 2018). However, 
besides the huge number of positive HMB effects described in the literature, there 
are data reporting that prenatally administered HMB can exert a harmful effect on 
the foetus. HMB was found to increase insulin resistance in piglets, which in the 
future might predispose them to obesity and diabetes (Wan et al., 2016 a). Moreover, 
brain developmental disorders were observed in newborn males of the spiny mouse 
(Krawczyk et al., 2016).
It has been shown that many reproductive problems observed during puberty may 
be associated with developmental disorders in the prenatal and neonatal period (Chan 
et al., 2015; Evans et al., 2012; Dupont et al., 2012). Folliculogenesis is controlled 
not only by systemic endocrine hormones such as gonadotropins or steroids but also 
by a variety of intraovarian paracrine factors including growth factors and signaling 
molecules, which form a complex communication network in the ovarian follicles 
(Aaron et al., 2015; Morita and Tilly, 1999; Tingen et al., 2009). Through a series 
of activation steps, primordial follicles are transformed into primary follicles, and 
this process is critical for ovarian development (Tingen et al., 2009). The process of 
primordial follicle formation in pigs begins at day 56 of gestation and transition into 
the primary stage is first observed at day 90 of gestation (Bielańska-Osuchowska, 
2006). Several growth factors appear to be important for follicle formation. The 
Kit ligand (also the SCF-stem cell factor), BMP-4 (bone morphogenetic protein 4), 
bFGF (basic fibroblastic factor), and the IGF-1/IGFR-1 system (insulin-like growth 
factor 1 and its cognate receptor) induce primordial follicle development and stimu-
late primordial to primary as well as primary to secondary follicle transition (Høyer 
et al., 2005; Morita and Tilly, 1999; Morita et al., 1999; Nilsson and Skinner, 2003,  
2004).
 Our previous findings indicated that prenatal HMB treatment dysregulated hor -
monal homeostasis and impaired early folliculogenesis, which led to ovarian mor -
phology abnormalities in newborn piglets (Hułas-Stasiak et al., 2019). Therefore, 
we hypothesize that HMB may alter the expression of growth factors that regulate 
ovarian follicular development. To verify this hypothesis, the expression of the Kit 
ligand, BMP-4, bFGF, and the IGF-1/IGFR-1 system, which are involved in primor-
dial follicle activation, was examined using Western-blot and immunohistochemistry 
in piglets originated from sows fed diet supplemented with HMB.
HMB and the ovarian growth factors expression
901
Material and methods
The experiment was approved by the Local Ethics Committee on Animal Experi-
mentation of the University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Poland (No. 2014/29).
Animals and experimental design 
The study involved 12 newborn “before-first-colostrum-uptake” female piglets 
born by 12 sows (Puławska breed) after physiological farrowing and bred to the 
same boar. The control and experimental groups consisted of primiparous sows to 
avoid the effect of the number of pregnancies on the birth weight in the offspring. The 
pregnant sows at similar age (10 months) and with similar body weight (100–120 kg) 
were assigned into two equal groups: the control (n = 6) and experimental (HMB-
treated, n = 6). The animals were kept individually in standard conditions (controlled 
temperature, humidity, and 12:12h light/dark cycle). They were provided with 
free access to fresh water and fed twice a day (2.3 kg/day/sow, at 08:00 a.m. and  
04:00 p.m.) with well-balanced standard commercial diet formulated to meet or ex-
ceed the nutritional requirement for pregnant and lactating sows (NRC, 2012).
The experimental group were administered calcium salt of β-hydroxy-β-
methylbutyrate (CaHMB; Lonza, Switzerland) at the dose of 0.2 g/kg b.w./day be-
tween gestation days 70 and 90. The dose of HMB followed the report by Świetlicka 
and collaborators (Świetlicka et al., 2016). At a dose of 0.2 g/kg b.w./day, HMB was 
found to exert a significant effect on enamel surface development in spiny mouse 
offspring. The days chosen for the HMB exposure are critical for ovarian develop -
ment in pigs, i.e. the time of primordial follicle formation and the beginning of its 
transition into the primary stage. Powdered HMB was added to the first portion of 
food administered as the morning meal. The control group received placebo-sup-
plemented feed (CaCO3 at the daily dose of 0.2 g/kg b.w.). Newborn female piglets 
from the control and HMB-treated groups were weighed (Table 1). Then only one 
female piglet was selected from each litter for the experiment with birth weight close 
to the average body weight of the other females in the litter (control, n = 6; HMB-
treated group, n = 6). The detailed description of the birth weight and performance 
in newborn piglets in experimental groups is given in Table 1. The piglets were 
euthanized by intravenous injection of a lethal dose of pentobarbitalum natricum 
(Morbital, Biowet, Puławy, Poland) immediately after parturition. The ovaries were 
isolated and weighed.
Table 1. The effect of prenatal HMB supplementation on birth weight and performance in newborn piglets
Parameter Control HMB
Birth weight of selected piglets (g) 880±85 1230±122**
Birth weight of females in litter (g) 885±133   1241±222***
Litter size 10.5±0.5 9.5±1.2
Litter weight (kg) 12.3±0.6 14.7±0.9**
Number of females per litter 5.33±0.5 4.66±0.5*
Sex ratio, female to male 1.04±0.1 0.95±0.2
1Data are presented as mean ± SD; *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001.

=== PAGE 18 ===
M. Hułas-Stasiak et al. 
902
Histology 
The right ovaries from the newborn piglets (12 ovaries in total) were fixed in 
phosphate-buffered 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 h at room temperature, dehydrated, 
and embedded in Paraplast (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The ovaries were 
serially sectioned at 5 µm thickness on a rotary microtome. Consecutive sections 
were placed on polysine-coated glass slides (SuperFrost Plus, Thermo Scientific, 
Germany) and processed for routine immunohistochemistry. 
Immunohistochemistry
Briefly, the Paraplast sections were deparaffinised, rehydrated, and microwaved 
3x5 min in 10 mM citrate buffer, pH 6.0, to retrieve antigenicity. The activity of en-
dogenous peroxidase was blocked with 3% H 2O2 in methanol (1:1) and nonspecific 
binding was prevented by application of the UltraCruz ® Blocking Reagent (Santa 
Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Rabbit polyclonal anti-Kit ligand, 
anti-BMP-4, anti-bFGF, anti-IGFR-1 (each in dilution 1:100, Abcam, Cambridge, 
UK) and anti-IGF-1 (1:100, LifeSpan BioSciences, Inc) antibodies were added to 
the tissue sections. Next, the samples were incubated overnight at 4°C. The anti -
gens were visualized with the use of secondary biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG  
(1:200, 1 h at room temperature, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), an ImmunoCruz ® ABC 
kit (30 min at room temperature; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), 
and a 3,3’-diaminobenzidine (DAB substrate kit, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), which 
is a substrate-staining chromogen. Tris-buffered saline (TBS) pH 7.6 was used to 
rinse the sections after each step of the procedure. The sections were counterstained 
with Mayer’s hematoxylin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Next, the slides 
were dehydrated and mounted in DPX. The negative controls were not treated with 
the primary antibody. Finally, the slides were examined using an LSM5 Pascal mi-
croscope (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) coupled with a digital camera (AxioCamHRc, 
Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) and a computer.
Follicle classification 
The egg nests represented two subcategories based on their appearance: a healthy 
egg nest, i.e. a group of tightly packed oocytes surrounded by a layer of squamous 
follicular cells and egg nest breakdown with the loss of connections between de-
generated oocytes and pre-granulosa cells migrating into the nests (Tingen et al., 
2009). Follicles were identified following the classification system proposed by Ped-
ersen and Peters (1968), which distinguishes primordial follicles with an oocyte sur-
rounded by flattened granulosa cells, primary follicles with a single layer of cuboi-
dal granulosa cells, and transitional follicles with 1–2 layers of columnar granulosa 
cells. Data on the number of individual types of egg nests and ovarian follicles were 
presented in a recent study (Hułas-Stasiak et al., 2019).
Western-blot analysis 
The left ovaries obtained from the 6 experimental and 6 control piglets were used 
for western-blot analysis. The samples were homogenized in lysis buffer (125 mM 
TRIS-HCl pH 6.8; 4% SDS; 10% glycerol; 100 mM DTT), boiled in a water bath for 
HMB and the ovarian growth factors expression
903
10 min, and centrifuged at 10000 × g for 10 min. Next, the supernatant was collected. 
The Bradford method (Bradford, 1976) was employed to determine the protein con-
tent. Samples containing 80 µg of protein were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and 
then electroblotted onto an Immobilon P membrane (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, 
USA). After the transfer, the membranes were blocked with 3% low fat milk in PBS 
for 1 h and incubated overnight with polyclonal rabbit anti-Kit ligand, anti-BMP-4, 
anti-bFGF, anti-IGFR-1 (1:500, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and IGF-1 (1:500, Life-  
Span BioSciences, Inc) antibodies. The membranes were washed three times for 10 
min with PBS containing 0.05% TRITON X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, 
USA) and incubated for 2 h in the presence of a 1:30 000 dilution of alkaline phos-
phatase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (Abcam, Cambridge, UK). The membranes 
were visualized after addition of BCIP (5-bromo-4-chloro-3indolyl phosphate, Sig-
ma-Aldrich) and NBT (nitrotetrazolium blue chloride, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, 
MO, USA), which give a blue reaction colour. An anti-β-actin antibody (1:2000, 
Sigma-Aldrich) was used as the loading control. The blots were densitometrically 
quantified and normalized to their corresponding β-actin bands. In the end, the public 
domain ImageJ program with “Gel Analysis” function was used. Semi-quantitative 
analysis was performed for three separately repeated experiments from each control 
and HMB-treated group.
Image analysis 
The slides were subjected to immunohistochemical assays in the same labora-
tory conditions to obtain comparable staining intensity. The next step consisted in 
quantitative estimation of the intensity of the immunohistochemistry reaction (IHC) 
for the following proteins: Kit ligand, BMP-4, bFGF, IGF-1, and IGFR-1. This was 
achieved by analysis of digital images from at least 6 sections (for each proteins) of 
ovaries from each control and HMB-treated female. In total, 36 sections (per group 
for each protein) were estimated. The digital colour images were registered with the 
use of an LSM 5 Pascal confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) equipped 
with an AxioCamHRc camera (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) and coupled with a com-
puter. A 40x objective was used to capture images of egg nests and primordial, pri-
mary, and transitional ovarian follicles. All images were saved as 24-bit RGB colour 
images in TIFF (Tagged Image File Format) for quantification. A colour threshold 
function of ImageJ (Wayne Rasband, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, 
MD, USA) was used to separate DAB stained pixels from the background. The hue, 
saturation, and brightness for a randomly chosen image were established to define 
the colour threshold range for DAB. Then, the selected threshold was applied to 
extract the positively stained colour pixels (DAB) from the background (hematoxy-
lin stained pixels) in the analysed images. Ten separate measurements (per section) 
for each type of the egg nest and ovarian follicles were made. The intensity of the 
IHC reaction was evaluated in the 8-bit greyscale. The pixel intensity values in the 
digital image analysis range from 0 to 255, with 0 representing the black and 255 the 
white shade of grey. For better illustration of the results (graphs in the text), the pixel 
brightness values were measured on inverted images in the 8-bit greyscale (from 
0-white to 255-black).

=== PAGE 19 ===
M. Hułas-Stasiak et al. 
904
Statistical analysis
All results are expressed as means ± SD. Normal distribution of data was checked 
with the Shapiro-Wilk test. Brown-Forsythe tests were applied to determine the 
equality of variance. Data were analysed with the use of Mann-Whitney U test when 
normal distribution of data and/or equality of variance were not met. A P-value less 
than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were carried 
out using STATISTICA 13.1 software (StatSoft, Inc., 2017).
Results
Immunohistochemistry 
BMP-4 immunolocalization
In the investigated ovaries from the control and HMB-treated piglets, BMP-4 
staining was detected within egg nests and follicles (Figure 1 A–D). However, BMP-
4 staining observed in the oocytes within healthy and breakdown egg nests increased 
significantly (P<0.001, P<0.01, respectively) in the HMB-treated group in compari-
son with the control (Figure 1 E). Interestingly, in the control group, BMP-4 labelling 
was mainly limited to the granulosa cells of primordial follicles (Figure 1 D inset), 
while in the HMB-treated group oocytes were also stained positively (Figure 1 B 
inset). In turn, in the more advanced follicular stages (primary and transitional),  
the BMP-4 protein was predominantly localized in the granulosa cells; how-
ever, diffuse staining was also noted in the oocytes in both examined groups of  
piglets (Figure 1 B, D). Following the HMB treatment, the intensity of the BMP-4  
immunostaining increased significantly in the primordial (P<0.01), primary  
(P<0.01), and transitional (P<0.05) follicles compared with the control group  
(Figure 1 E). 
Kit ligand 
Kit ligand staining was observed in the oocytes present within the healthy and 
breakdown egg nests in the HMB-treated and control groups (Figure 2 A, B, F). 
The HMB treatment resulted in significantly increased immunostaining within 
healthy egg nests (P<0.05), compared with the control group (Figure 2 H). There 
were no statistical differences in the breakdown egg nests in this regard between the  
two examined groups (Figure 2 H). However, in the HMB-treated group, the in-
tensity of Kit ligand staining in the breakdown egg nests was reduced (P<0.05), 
compared with the healthy nests (Figure 2 H). Furthermore, the Kit ligand protein 
was also detected in the cytoplasm of the oocytes and granulosa cells of the primor- 
dial follicles in the HMB-treated group (Figure 2 D). However, in the control  
group the reaction was predominantly observed in granulosa cells of these fol- 
licles (Figure 2 E). The intensity of the Kit ligand immunostaining in the primor- 
dial, primary, and transitional follicles was significantly higher (P<0.001,  
P<0.01, P<0.01, respectively) in the HMB-treated group than in the control (Figu- 
re 2 C, G, H). 
HMB and the ovarian growth factors expression
905
Data are presented as mean ± SD; *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001.
Figure 1. Immunolocalization of BMP-4 in HMB-treated (A, B) and control (C, D) ovaries from  
newborn piglets. Brown staining indicates positive reaction in the cells. BMP-4 was localized in  
oocytes within healthy (arrow) and breakdown (star) egg nest in both examined groups of piglets (A, C). 
In the HMB-treated group, oocytes and granulosa cells of primordial follicles were positively stained  
(B, inset), whereas in the control group BMP-4 immunostaining was mainly detected in granulosa cells 
(D, inset). In developing follicles, the BMP-4 protein was predominantly localized in granulosa cells 
(arrows); however, faintly stained oocytes (arrowheads) were also noted in both examined groups (B, 
D). Scale bars represent 100 µm. E. Chart represents the intensity of BMP-4 immunostaining in control 
and HMB-treated ovaries from newborn piglets


=== PAGE 20 ===
M. Hułas-Stasiak et al. 
906
Data are presented as mean ± SD; *P<0.05; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001
Figure 2. Immunolocalization of Kit ligand in HMB-treated (A–D) and control (E–G) ovaries from 
newborn piglets. Kit ligand staining was detected within the healthy (arrows) and breakdown (stars) 
egg nests in the HMB-treated (A, B) and the control group (F). In the HMB-treated group, positive  
labelling was also observed in oocytes (arrowhead) and granulosa cells (arrows) of primordial follicles  
(D), while in the control group it was mainly localized in  granulosa cells (E). Kit ligand staining  
was noted in oocytes (arrowhead) and granulosa cells (arrows) of developing follicles in both the  
HMB-treated (C) and the control group (G). Scale bars represent 100 µm. H. Chart represents the inten-
sity of Kit ligand immunostaining in control and HMB-treated ovaries from newborn piglets
HMB and the ovarian growth factors expression
907
Data are presented as mean ± SD; *P<0.05; **P<0.01
Figure 3. Immunolocalization of IGFR-1 in HMB-treated (A, B) and control (C, D) ovaries from  
newborn piglets. Positive IGFR-1 labelling was noted in oocytes clustered within the healthy (arrows) 
and breakdown (stars) egg nests in the HMB-treated (A) and control group (C). Stronger immunostain -
ing was observed in oocytes (arrowhead) while weaker in granulosa cells (arrows) of developing  
follicles in both examined groups (B, D). Furthermore, oocytes (arrowhead) from primordial follicles  
indicated more intensive immunosignal in the HMB-treated group (B, inset) than in the control (D, in -
set). Scale bars represent 100 µm. E. Chart represents the intensity of IGFR-1 immunostaining in control 
and HMB-treated ovaries from newborn piglets


=== PAGE 21 ===
M. Hułas-Stasiak et al. 
908
Data are presented as mean ± SD; **P<0.01
Figure 4. Immunolocalization of IGF-1 in HMB-treated (A–C) and control (D–F) ovaries from new -
born piglets. IGF-1 staining was noted in the healthy (arrows) and breakdown (stars) egg nests in the  
HMB-treated (A, B) and control group (D, E). In ovarian follicles, immunoreaction was predominantly 
seen in granulosa cells (arrows), while oocytes (arrowheads) were weakly labelled (C, F). Scale bars  
represent 100 µm. G. Chart represents the intensity of IGF-1 immunostaining in control and  
HMB-treated ovaries from newborn piglets
HMB and the ovarian growth factors expression
909
Data are presented as mean ± SD; **P<0.01
Figure 5. Immunolocalization of bFGF in HMB-treated (A, B) and control (C, D) ovaries from newborn 
piglets. Positive bFGF immunostaining was visible in oocyte egg nests (arrows) in the HMB-treated 
(A) and control group (C). Oocytes (arrowheads) and granulosa cells (arrows) from all follicular stages 
indicated bFGF immunosignal in both the HMB-treated (B, B inset) and control group (D, D inset).  
A negative control was performed in the absence of primary antibodies (A, inset). Scale bars represent 
100 µm. E. Chart represents the intensity of bFGF immunostaining in control and HMB-treated ovaries 
from newborn piglets 


=== PAGE 22 ===
M. Hułas-Stasiak et al. 
910
Data are presented as mean ± SD; **P<0.01; ***P<0.001 
Figure 6. Protein expression in the ovaries obtained from control and HMB-treated newborn piglets.  
(A) The relative abundance of IGF-1R, Kit ligand, BMP-4, bFGF, and IGF-1 was evaluated densito -
metrically and expressed as the ratio relative to β-actin. 
(B) Representative Western blots of examined proteins in the ovaries obtained from the control and the 
HMB-treated group
IGFR-1 and IGF-1 immunolocalization 
More intensive IGFR-1 labelling (P<0.01) was noted in the oocytes clustered 
within the healthy egg nests in the HMB-treated group than in the control (Figure 3 
A, B, C). There were no statistical differences in the breakdown egg nests between 
the experimental group and the control in this regard. However, as with the Kit li-
gand, the intensity of the IGFR-1 immunoreaction within the breakdown egg nests 
significantly decreased (P<0.01) compared to the healthy nests in the same HMB-
treated group (Figure 3 E). Moreover, stronger immunostaining in the oocytes and 
weaker in the granulosa cells was observed in primordial and developing follicles 
in both groups examined (Figure 3 B, D). However, the IGFR-1 immunosignal in 
primordial follicles was significantly higher (P<0.05) in the HMB-treated group than 
in the control (Figure 3 B inset, D inset, E). There were no statistical differences 
between the primary and transitional follicles in this regard (Figure 3 E).
In contrast to IGFR-1, significantly weaker staining for IGF-1 was noted in the 
healthy and breakdown egg nests (P<0.01) in the HMB-treated group than in the 
control one (Figure 4 A, B, D, E, G). There were no statistical differences between 
the primordial, primary, and transitional follicles in this regard (Figure 4 G). The 
presence of the IGF-1 protein in the ovarian follicles was predominantly evident in 
the granulosa cells, whereas the oocytes were weakly labelled (Figure 4 C, F).
bFGF 
Positive labelling was observed in the oocytes within the healthy and breakdown 
egg nests, in the oocytes and granulosa cells of the primordial and developing fol-
licles in both the control and the HMB-treated group (Figure 5). Interestingly, the 
intensity of bFGF immunostaining in the egg nests as well as in all follicular stages 
decreased dramatically (P<0.01) in the HMB-treated group in comparison with the 
control (Figure 5 E).
HMB and the ovarian growth factors expression
911
Western-blot analysis 
Analysed proteins were observed as single bands at approximately 155 kDa for 
IGF-1R, 55 kDa for Kit ligand, 47 kDa for BMP4, 31 kDa for bFGF and 7.5 kDa 
for IGF-1 (Figure 6 B). In the ovaries of newborn piglets, the prenatal HMB treat -
ment increased the expression of BMP4 (P<0.01), Kit ligand (P<0.001), and IGFR-1 
(P<0.01), whereas the IGF-1 and bFGF protein levels were significantly decreased 
(P<0.01, P<0.001 respectively) in comparison with the control group (Figure 6 A, 
B). The obtained results confirmed the immunohistochemical analysis.
Discussion
Germ cell apoptosis
There is a general agreement that only somatic components of the ovary produce 
the Kit ligand and IGF-1 growth factors, which have paracrine action on germ cell 
expressing the c-kit and IGFR-1 receptors (Behl and Kaul, 2002; Parrot and Skinner, 
1999). However, in the present study, staining for the Kit ligand and IGF-1 proteins 
was also detected in oocytes clustered within egg nests of the porcine ovary. Indeed, 
there are studies which have confirmed the mRNA and protein expression of Kit li-
gand and its receptor c-kit in oogonia of the foetal mouse ovary (Doneda et al., 2002; 
Kang et al. 2003). Similar to our observations, the Kit ligand/c-kit as well as IGF-1/
IGFR-1 co-localization was documented in the human foetal germ cells (Høyer et al., 
2005; Poljicanin et al., 2015). 
Oogonia/oocytes survival depends on growth factors, and a limited supply of 
growth factors might determine their death (Hussein, 2005; Morita et al., 1999; 
Nilsson et al., 2002). An anti-apoptotic effect of the Kit ligand on primordial germ 
cells, oogonia, and oocytes has been demonstrated in foetal gonads (Driancourt et 
al., 2000). Our previous findings showed that the prenatally administered HMB in-
creased the percentage of apoptotic oocytes within breakdown egg nests compared to 
the control (Hułas-Stasiak et al., 2019). Current findings indicated that the intensity 
of the Kit ligand immunostaining within healthy egg nests increased after the HMB 
administration; however, it was reduced during egg nest breakdown. This may there-
fore indicate the involvement of Kit ligand in the regulation of oocyte apoptosis into 
egg nests. Interestingly, Kit ligand alone has been shown to be completely ineffec-
tive in preventing oogonium and oocyte loss while a combination of survival factors 
is necessary to fully suppress germ cell apoptosis in an in vitro model (Morita and 
Tilly, 1999; Morita et al., 1999). The inclusion of IGF-1 alone into the culture me-
dium significantly reduced germ cell apoptosis. However, the addition of all factors 
(IGF-1, Kit ligand plus LIF) to cultured ovaries maintained the germ cell numbers 
to levels that were not significantly different from those in the IGF-1-treated ovaries 
(Morita et al., 1999). It seems that IGF-1 alone is a potent survival factor and the 
main inhibitor of germ cell apoptosis in cultured foetal ovaries. In the present study 
the intensity of IGF-1 staining decreased in both healthy and breakdown egg nests 
in the HMB-treated group. Surprisingly, the intensity of IGF-1 receptor (IGFR-1) 
staining was significantly higher in healthy egg nests than in the breakdown egg 

=== PAGE 23 ===
M. Hułas-Stasiak et al. 
912
nests. Thus, the altered IGF-1/IGFR-1 signalling and an insufficient level of IGF-1 
and Kit ligand proteins may promote germ cell apoptosis within egg nests in the 
HMB-treated ovaries. 
There are data reporting that another factor, i.e. BMP-4, can reduce the number 
of primordial germ cells (PGCs) in the human foetal ovary by promoting PGC apop-
tosis (Childs et al., 2010). Moreover, a culture of foetal mouse ovaries with BMP-4 
has been shown to induce a testicular-like phenotype and reduce germ cell numbers 
(Ross et al., 2003).
Interestingly, after the HMB treatment, the intensity of BMP-4 staining increased 
significantly in the oocytes within the healthy and breakdown egg nests. Therefore, 
it cannot be excluded that BMP-4 is involved in germ cell death and reduction of 
the oocyte pool after HMB supplementation. Similarly, basic FGF signalling is also 
critical to proliferation of primordial germ cells thereby controlling the number of 
germ cells in mice (Resnick et al., 1998). In the present study, bFGF was localized 
in oocytes clustered within egg nests and the intensity in this compartment decreased 
in the HMB-treated group compared with the control. Moreover, the bFGF protein 
expression in the whole ovarian homogenates was dramatically lower after the HMB 
treatment. Therefore, an anti-apoptotic action of bFGF should not be excluded either.
The network of interactions between all these growth factors is needed to regu-
late nest breakdown and primordial follicle assembly (Tingen et al., 2009). The dis-
ruption of these intracellular signalling pathways may lead to enhanced germ cell 
apoptosis within egg nests. Our findings suggest that HMB may alter the expression 
of growth factors that cause oocyte apoptosis within egg nests.
Follicle recruitment
Our previous findings reported that HMB can accelerate follicular recruitment 
(Hułas-Stasiak et al., 2019). Therefore, we hypothesized that some of the growth fac-
tors mentioned above are involved in follicle recruitment and growth. One of them 
is the Kit ligand. Parrott and Skinner (1999) reported that the Kit ligand is predomi-
nantly produced in granulosa cells and acts as a signal from granulosa cells to oo-
cytes and surrounding stroma to promote the primordial to primary follicle transition. 
However, its cognitive receptor c-kit is expressed in oocyte oolemma (Driancourt et 
al., 2000). Indeed, in the present study, Kit ligand staining was mainly observed in 
the granulosa cells of primordial and growing follicles in both examined groups. 
Surprisingly, in the HMB-treated group, the cytoplasm of oocytes from all follicles 
showed intense immunolabelling for the Kit ligand, in contrast to the control group, 
in which oocytes were faintly stained. Similar to our observations, the Kit ligand was 
also detected in the oocytes of primordial and growing follicles of neonatal mouse 
(Kang et al., 2003) and human ovaries (Høyer et al., 2005). It is very likely that the 
detection of the Kit ligand in the oocyte is a consequence of receptor-mediated en-
docytosis, and the Kit ligand protein but not mRNA can be immunolocalized within 
oocytes at all stages of folliculogenesis (Hut et al., 2006).
There are data reporting that the Kit ligand alone significantly increased the pro-
portion of developing follicles in cultured neonatal rat ovaries (Nilsson and Skinner, 
2003; Parrot and Skinner, 1999) and inhibited oocyte apoptosis in primordial fol-
HMB and the ovarian growth factors expression
913
licles (Jin et al., 2004) as well as promoted granulosa cell proliferation of cultured 
mouse ovaries (Reynaud et al., 2000). 
Similar to the Kit ligand, BMP-4 was attached to the growing list of paracrine 
growth factors that have been shown to regulate the primordial to primary follicle 
transition (da Cunha et al., 2017; Nilsson and Skinner, 2003; Shimizu et al., 2004). In 
the current study, BMP-4 staining was detected in the oocytes and granulosa cells of 
primordial and developing follicles in the HMB-treated group. However, in the con-
trol group, the BMP-4 labelling was mainly limited to granulosa cells of primordial 
follicles. This suggests that BMP-4 can be involved in the activation of oocytes in 
primordial follicles from HMB-treated piglets. Nilsson and Skinner (2003) observed 
a significant increase in the number of developing follicles in cultured rat ovaries 
treated with BMP-4 compared to the control. Similar to the Kit ligand, BMP-4 can 
act as a mitogen for granulosa cells and surrounding stromal cells, which can promote 
follicular transformation from primordial to further stages of development (Nilsson 
and Skinner, 2003). Indeed, our previous findings showed that the Ki67 and PCNA 
proliferation index of granulosa cells in transitional follicles was significantly higher 
in the HMB-exposed ovaries than in the control ones (Hułas-Stasiak et al., 2019). 
In addition, the present study indicated that the level of the Kit ligand and BMP-4 
proteins within the piglets’ ovaries significantly increased after the HMB treatment. 
Therefore, we speculate that HMB may enhance the expression of the Kit ligand and 
BMP-4 factors which appear to be responsible for accelerated follicular recruitment.
Basic FGF is another factor that has been identified to regulate the primordial to 
primary follicle transition (Nilsson and Skinner, 2004; Nilsson et al., 2001; Lu et al., 
2015; Wang et al., 2014). In the present study, bFGF was detected in the oocytes and 
granulosa cells of primordial and developing follicles in both examined groups of 
piglets. This finding is consistent with many other studies describing the same locali-
zation in rat (Nilsson and Skinner, 2004; Nilsson et al., 2001), bovine (van Wezel et 
al., 1995), primate (Lu et al., 2015), and human (Wang et al., 2014; Yamamoto et al., 
1997) ovaries. In vitro studies have shown that bFGF can enhance primordial follicle 
activation and growth to the preantral stage in various species (Lu et al., 2015; Nils-
son and Skinner, 2004) including humans (Quennell et al., 2004; Wang et al., 2014) 
by stimulating the growth of theca and stromal cells (Nilsson and Skinner, 2004; 
Roberts and Ellis, 1999), as well as granulosa cell proliferation (Gospodarowicz and 
Bialecki, 1979; Lavranos et al., 1994; Roberts and Ellis, 1999). On the other hand, 
Ortega et al. (1998) reported that basic FGF is not absolutely required for primordial 
transition to occur, as bFGF knock-out mice are fertile. Surprisingly, in our study, 
the expression of bFGF protein decreased dramatically after the HMB treatment in 
relation to the control. It seems that the Kit ligand and BMP-4 or other growth fac-
tors may compensate for the low level of bFGF expression in HMB-treated ovaries.
IGF-1 has been shown in experimental animals to be a mitogen, a survival fac-
tor, and a stimulator of follicle growth (Martins et al., 2010; Monniaux et al., 1992; 
Stubbs et al., 2013; Zhao et al., 2001). Interestingly, in mice with a null mutation in 
the IGF-1 gene, follicle development is normal, until the late preantral stage, where 
development arrest is noted (Baker et al., 1996). Thus, IGF-1 appears to be important 
in the later stages of follicle development, but is not necessary at the initial stages 

=== PAGE 24 ===
M. Hułas-Stasiak et al. 
914
of follicle growth associated with the primordial to primary transition (Baker et al., 
1996). Kezele et al. (2002) also demonstrated that IGF-1 has a negligible effect on 
primordial to primary transition in the rat ovary. In the current study, IGF-1 and its 
receptor IGFR-1 were detected in the oocytes and granulosa cells of ovarian folli -
cles. This pattern of IGF1/IGFR-1 cellular distribution is consistent with other stud-
ies (Martins et al., 2010; Poljicanin et al., 2015). Furthermore, we showed that the 
prenatal treatment with HMB resulted in diminished expression of IGF-1 and elevat-
ed expression of IGFR-1, compared to the control ovaries. Thus, we speculate that 
the insufficient level of IGF-1 proteins can impair IGF-1/IGFR-1 signalling, which 
may rather reflect its effect on egg nests apoptosis rather than on follicle transition.
Conclusion
Interactions between various factors such as the Kit ligand, BMP-4, bFGF, and 
IGF1/IGF-1R will provide a potential sequence of events involved in the initial pro-
cess of folliculogenesis. The current findings show that BMP-4 and the Kit ligand 
can act as key regulators promoting follicle transition from the primordial to primary 
and transitional stages. On the other hand, these proteins may also control the oocyte 
apoptosis within egg nests. Furthermore, downregulation of the bFGF expression 
and altered IGF-1/IGFR-1 signalling can be involved in oocyte death and lead to 
reduction of the primordial follicle reserve. These data suggest that HMB can impair 
early folliculogenesis by modulating the expression of growth factors. The depletion 
of germ cell stock and acceleration of follicular recruitment can cause premature 
gonadal failure. The results obtained undermine the opinions about the safe impact 
of HMB on the body. Further research is necessary to gain information whether the 
changes observed in the neonatal period are reversible or they persist and lead to 
fertility problems during female reproductive life.
References
A a r o n  J.W., H s u e h  A.J.W., K a w a m u r a  K., C h e n g  Y ., F a u s e r  B.C.J.M. (2015). Intraovarian 
control of early folliculogenesis. Endocr. Rev., 36: 1–24.
Baker J . ,  Hardy M . P . ,  Zhou J . ,  Bondy C . ,  Lupu F . ,  Bellvé A . R . ,  Efstratiadis A .  
(1996). Effects of an IGF-I gene null mutation on mouse reproduction. Mol. Endocrinol., 10:  
903–918.
B e h l  R., K a u l  R. (2002). Insulin like growth factor 1 and regulation of ovarian function in mammals. 
Indian J. Exp. Biol., 40: 25–30.
B i e l a ń s k a - O s u c h o w s k a  Z. (2006). Oogenesis in pig ovaries during the prenatal period: ultra-
structure and morphometry. Reprod. Biol., 6: 161–193.
Blicharski T . ,  Tomaszewska,  E . ,  Dobrowolski P . ,  Hułas-Stasiak M . ,  Muszyń -
s k i  S. (2017). A metabolite of leucine (β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate) given to sows during preg-
nancy alters bone development of their newborn offspring by hormonal modulation. PLoS One, 12, 
e0179693.
B r a d f o r d  M.M. (1976). A rapid and sensitive method for quantification of microgram quantities of 
protein utilizing the principle of protein-die binding. Anal. Biochem., 72: 248–254.
C h a n  K.A., T s o u l i s  M.W., S l o b o d a  D.M. (2015). Early-life nutritional effects on the female 
reproductive system. J. Endocrinol., 224: R45–R62.
Childs A . J . ,  Kinnell H . L . ,  Collins C . S . ,  Hogg K . R . ,  Bayne A . L . ,  Green S . J . ,  McNeil-
HMB and the ovarian growth factors expression
915
l y  A.S., A n d e r s o n  R.A. (2010). BMP signaling in the human fetal ovary is developmentally 
regulated and promotes primordial germ cell apoptosis. Stem Cells, 28: 1368–1378.
C i e ś l a k  D., N i e r a d k a - I w a n i c k a  B. (2018). β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) supplemen-
tation during pregnancy and perinatal period in animals studies and possible application in humans. 
J. Educ. Health Sport, 8: 11–18.
C u n h a  E.V . da, d e  S o u z a  G.B., P a s s o s  J.R.S., S i l v a  A.W.B., D a u  A.M., S a r a i v a  M.V .A., 
L o b o  R.N.B., S i l v a  J.R.V . (2017). Effects of bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) on in vitro 
development and survival of bovine preantral follicles enclosed in fragments ovarian tissue. Zygote, 
25: 256–264.
D o n e d a  L., K l i n g e r  F.G., L a r i z z a  L., D e  F e l i c i  M. (2002). KL/KIT co-expression in mouse 
fetal oocytes. Int. J. Dev. Biol., 46: 1015–1021.
D r i a n c o u r t  M.A., R e y n a u d  K., C o r t v r i n d t  R., S m i t z  J. (2000). Roles of KIT and KIT 
LIGAND in ovarian function. Rev. Reprod., 5: 143–152.
Dupont C . ,  Cordier A . G . ,  Junien C . ,  Mandon-Pépin B . ,  Levy R . ,  Chavatte-Pal-  
m e r  P. (2012). Maternal environment and the reproductive function of the offspring. Theriogenol-
ogy, 78: 1405–1414.
Evans A . C . ,  Mossa F . ,  Walsh S . W . ,  Scheetz D . ,  Jimenez-Krassel F . ,  Ireland J . L . ,  
S m i t h  G.W., I r e l a n d  J.J. (2012). Effects of maternal environment during gestation on ovar-
ian folliculogenesis and consequences for fertility in bovine offspring. Reprod. Domest. Anim., 47 
Suppl 4: 31–37.
F l u m m e r  C., K r i s t e n s e n  N.B., T h e i l  P.K. (2012). Body composition of piglets from sows fed 
the leucine metabolite β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate in late gestation. J. Anim. Sci., 90: 442–444.
G o s p o d a r o w i c z  D., B i a l e c k i  H. (1979). Fibroblast and epidermal growth factors are mito-
genic agents for cultured granulosa cells of rodent, porcine, and human origin. Endocrinology, 104: 
757–764.
H ø y e r  P.E., B y s k o v  A.G., M ø l l g å r d  K. (2005). Stem cell factor and c-Kit in human primordial 
germ cells and fetal ovaries. Mol. Cell Endocrinol., 234: 1–10.
Hułas-Stasiak M . ,  Jakubowicz-Gil J . ,  Dobrowolski P . ,  Tomaszewska E . ,  
M u s z y ń s k i  S. (2019). Maternal β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) supplementation during 
pregnancy affects early folliculogenesis in the ovary of newborn piglets. Theriogenology, 128:  
91–100.
H u s s e i n  M.R. (2005). Apoptosis in the ovary: molecular mechanisms. Hum. Reprod., 11: 162–178.
H u t  K.J., M c L a u g h l i n  E.A., H o l l a n d  M.K. (2006). Kit ligand and c-Kit have diverse roles dur-
ing mammalian oogenesis and folliculogenesis. Mol. Hum. Reprod., 12: 61–69.
J i n  X., H a n  C.S., Yu  F.Q., W e i  P., H u  Z.Y ., L i u  Y .X. (2004). Anti-apoptotic action of stem cell 
factor on oocytes in primordial follicles and its signal transduction. Mol. Reprod. Dev., 70:  82–90.
K a n g  J.S., L e e  C.J., L e e  J.M., R h a  J.Y ., S o n g  K.W., P a r k  M.H. (2003). Follicular expression 
of c-Kit/SCF and inhibin-alpha in mouse ovary during development. J. Histochem. Cytochem., 51: 
1447–1458.
K e z e l e  P.R., N i l s s o n  E.E., S k i n n e r  M.K. (2002). Insulin but not insulin-like growth factor-1 
promotes the primordial to primary follicle transition. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol., 192: 37–43.
Krawczyk A . ,  Rycerz K . ,  Jaworska-Adamu J . ,  Tomaszewska E . ,  Dobrowol -
s k i  P. (2016). Calretinin expression in hippocampus of mouse offspring from dams treated with 
β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate. Med. Weter., 72: 423–429.
L a v r a n o s  T.C., R o d g e r s  H.F., B e r t o n c e l l o  I., R o d g e r s  R.J. (1994). Anchorage-indepen-
dent culture of bovine granulosa cells: The effects of basic fibroblast growth factor and dibutyryl 
cAMP on cell division and differentiation. Exp. Cell Res., 211: 245–251.
L u  C.L., Ya n  J., Z h i  X., X i a  X., W a n g  T.R., Ya n  L.Y ., Yu  Y ., D i n g  T., G a o  J.M., L i  R., 
Q i a o  J. (2015). Basic fibroblast growth factor promotes macaque follicle development in vitro. 
Reproduction, 149: 425–433.
Martins F . S . ,  Saraiva M . V . A . ,  Celestino J . J . H . ,  Bruno J . B . ,  Almeida A . P . ,  Cun- 
ha R . M . S . ,  Silva J . R . V . ,  Campello C . C . ,  Lucci C . M . ,  Matos M . H . T . ,  Figueire- 
d o  J.R. (2010). Expression of protein and mRNA encoding insulin growth factor-I (IGF-I) in goat 
ovarian follicles and the influence of IGF-I on in vitro development and survival of caprine preantral 
follicles. Anim. Reprod., 7: 349–361.

=== PAGE 25 ===
M. Hułas-Stasiak et al. 
916
M o n n i a u x  D., P i s s e l e t  C. (1992). Control of proliferation and differentiation of ovine granulosa 
cells by insulin-like growth factor-I and follicle-stimulating hormone in vitro. Biol. Reprod., 46: 
109–111.
M o r i t a  Y ., T i l l y  J.L. (1999). Oocyte apoptosis: like sand through an hourglass. Dev. Biol., 213: 
1–17.
Morita Y . ,  Manganaro T . F . ,  Tao X . J . ,  Martimbeau S . ,  Donahoe P . K . ,  T i l l y  J . L .  ( 1 9 9 9 ) .  
Requirement for phosphatidylinositol-3’-kinase in cytokine-mediated germ cell survival during fetal 
oogenesis in the mouse. Endocrinology, 140: 941–949.
N i l s s o n  E.E., S k i n n e r  M.K. (2003). Bone morphogenetic protein-4 acts as an ovarian follicle 
survival factor and promotes primordial follicle development. Biol. Reprod., 69: 1265–1272.
N i l s s o n  E.E., S k i n n e r  M.K. (2004). Kit ligand and basic fibroblast growth factor interactions 
in the induction of ovarian primordial to primary follicle transition. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol., 214: 
19–25.
N i l s s o n  E., P a r r o t t  J.A., S k i n n e r  M.K. (2001). Basic fibroblast growth factor induces primor-
dial follicle development and initiates folliculogenesis. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol., 175: 123–130.
N i l s s o n  E.E., K e z e l e  P., S k i n n e r  M.K. (2002). Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) promotes the 
primordial to primary follicle transition in rat ovaries. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol., 188: 65–73.
NRC, National Research Council (2012). Nutrient Requirements of Swine. National Academy Press, 
Washington, DC, USA, 11th ed., 420 pp.
O r t e g a  S., I t t m a n n  M., T s a n g  S.H., E r l i c h  M., B a s i l i c o  C. (1998). Neuronal defects 
and wound healing in mice lacking fibroblast growth factor 2. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., USA 95:  
5672–5677.
P a r r o t  J.A., S k i n n e r  M.K., (1999). Kit ligand/stem cell factor induces primordial follicle develop-
ment and initiates folliculogenesis. Endocrinology, 140: 4262–4271.
P e d e r s e n  T., P e t e r s  H. (1968). Proposal for a classification of oocytes and follicles in the mouse 
ovary. Reproduction, 17: 555–557.
Poljicanin A . ,  Filipovic N . ,  Vukusic Pusic T . ,  Soljic V . ,  Caric A . ,  Saraga-Ba-  
b i c  M., V u k o j e v i c  K. (2015). Expression pattern of RAGE and IGF-1 in the human fetal ovary 
and ovarian serous carcinoma. Acta Histochem., 117: 468–476.
Q u e n n e l l  J.H., S t a n t o n  J.A.L., H u r s t  P.R. (2004). Basic fibroblast growth factor expression in 
isolated small human ovarian follicles. Mol. Hum. Reprod., 10: 623–628.
R e s n i c k  J.L., O r t i z  M., K e l l e r  J.R., D o n o v a n  P.J. (1998). Role of fibroblast growth factors 
and their receptors in mouse primordial germ cell growth. Biol. Reprod., 59: 1224–1229.
R e y n a u d  K., C o r t v r i n d t  R., S m i t z  J., D r i a n c o u r t  M.A. (2000). Effects of Kit Ligand 
and anti-Kit antibody on growth of cultured mouse preantral follicles. Mol. Reprod. Dev., 56:  
483–494.
R o b e r t s  R.D., E l l i s  R.C.L. (1999). Mitogenic effects of fibroblast growth factors on chicken granu-
losa cell and theca cells in vitro. Biol. Reprod., 61: 1387–1392.
R o s s  A.J., T i l m a n  C., Ya o  H., M a c L a u g h l i n  D., C a p e l a  B. (2003). AMH induces meso-
nephric cell migration in XX gonads. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol., 211: 1–7.
S h i m i z u  T., Yo k o o  M., M i y a k e  Y ., S a s a d a  H., S a t o  E. (2004). Differential expression of 
bone morphogenetic protein 4-6 (BMP-4,5 and 6) and growth differentiation factor-9 (GDF-9) dur-
ing ovarian development in neonatal pigs. Domest. Anim. Enocrinol., 27: 397–405.
Stubbs S . A . ,  Webber L . J . ,  Stark J . ,  Rice S . ,  Margara R . ,  Lavery S . ,  Trew G . H . ,  Har-
d y  K., F r a n k s  S. (2013). Role of insulin-like growth factors in initiation of follicle growth in 
normal and polycystic human ovaries. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 98: 3298–3305.
Świetlicka I . ,  Muszyński S . ,  Tomaszewska E . ,  Dobrowolski P . ,  Kwaśniew-  
s k a  A., Ś w i e t l i c k i  M., S k i c  A., G o ł a c k i  K. (2016). Prenatally administered HMB modi-
fies the enamel surface roughness in spiny mice offspring: An atomic force microscopy study. Arch. 
Oral Biol., 70: 24–31.
T a t a r a  M.R., Ś l i w a  E., K r u p s k i  W. (2007). Prenatal programming of skeletal development in the 
offspring: effects of maternal treatment with β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate (HMB) on femur proper-
ties in pigs at slaughter age. Bone, 40: 1615–1622.
T i n g e n  C., K i m  A., W o o d r u f  T.K. (2009). The primordial pool of follicles and nest breakdown in 
mammalian ovaries. Mol. Hum. Reprod., 15: 795–803.
HMB and the ovarian growth factors expression
917
W a n  H.F., Z h u  J.T., S h e n  Y ., X i a n g  X., Y i n  H.J., F a n g  Z.F., C h e  L.Q., L i n  Y ., X u  S.Y ., 
F e n g  B., W u  D. (2016 a). Effects of dietary supplementation of β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate on 
sow performance and mRNA expression of myogenic markers in skeletal muscle of neonatal piglets. 
Reprod. Domest. Anim., 51: 134–142. 
Wan H . ,  Zhu J . ,  Su G . ,  Liu Y . ,  Hua L . ,  Hu L . ,  Wu C . ,  Zhang R . ,  Zhou P . ,  Shen Y . ,  Lin Y . ,  
X u  S., F a n g  Z., C h e  L., F e n g  B., W u  D. (2016 b). Dietary supplementation with β-hydroxy-
β-methylbutyrate calcium during the early postnatal period accelerates skeletal muscle fiber growth 
and maturity in intra-uterine growth-retarded and normal-birth-weight piglets. Br. J. Nutr., 115: 
1360–1309.
Wan H . ,  Zhu J . ,  Wu C . ,  Zhou P . ,  Shen Y . ,  Lin Y . ,  Xu S . ,  Che L . ,  Feng B . ,  Li J . ,  Fang Z . ,  
W u  D. (2017). Transfer of β-hydroxy-β-methylbutyrate from sows to their offspring and its impact 
on muscle fibre type transformation and performance in pigs. J. Anim. Sci. Biotechnol., 8: 2.
W a n g  T., Ya n  L., Ya n  J., L u  C., X i a  X., Y i n  T.L., Z h u  X.H., G a o  J.M., D i n g  T., H u  W.H., 
G u o  H.Y ., L i  R., Q i a o  J. (2014). Basic fibroblast growth factor promotes the development of 
human ovarian early follicle during growth in vitro. Hum. Reprod., 29: 568–576.
W e z e l  I.L. van, U m a p a t h y s i v a m  K., T i l l e y  W.D., R o d g e r s  R.J. (1995). Immunohisto-
chemical localization of basic fibroblast growth factor in bovine ovarian follicles. Mol. Cell. Endo-
crinol., 115: 133–140.
W i l s o n  G.J., W i l s o n  J.M., M a n n i n e n  A.H. (2008). Effects of beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyr-
ate (HMB) on exercise performance and body composition across varying levels of age, sex, and 
training experience: a review. Nutr. Metab., 5: 1.
Wilson J . M . ,  Fitschen P . J . ,  Campbell B . ,  Wilson G . J . ,  Zanchi N . ,  Taylor L . ,  Wil-
born C . ,  Kalman D . S . ,  Stout J . R . ,  Hoffman J . R . ,  Ziegenfuss T . N . ,  Lopez H . L . ,  
K r e i d e r  R.B., S m i t h - R u a n  A.E., A n t o n i o  J. (2013). International Society of Sports Nu-
trition Position Stand: beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate (HMB). J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr., 10: 6.
Yamamoto S . ,  Konishi I . ,  Nanbu K . ,  Komatsu T . ,  Mandai M . ,  Kuroda H . ,  Matsu-
s h i t a  K., M o r i  T. (1997). Immunohistochemical localization of basic fibroblast growth factor 
(bFGF) during folliculogenesis in the human ovary. Gynecol. Endocrinol., 11: 223–230.
Zhao J . ,  Tavene M . A . ,  Van Der Weijden G . C . ,  Bevers M . M . ,  Van Den Hurk R .  
(2001). Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) stimulates the development of cultured rat pre-antral 
follicles. Mol. Reprod. Develop., 58: 287–296.
Received: 16 IX 2019
Accepted: 25 II 2020
