Resource
Human skeletal development and regeneration are
shaped by functional diversity of stem cells across
skeletal sites
Graphical abstract
Highlights
d Single-cell RNA sequencing of hSSCs across ten skeletal
sites and adulthood
d Identiﬁcation, mapping, and functional assessment of four
principal hSSC subtypes
d A ﬁbrogenic hSSC subtype switch drives age- and disease-
related skeletal impairments
d New Boolean gene regulatory network analysis informs the
approach to target impaired hSSCs
Authors
Thomas H. Ambrosi, Sahar Taheri,
Kun Chen, ..., Michael T. Longaker,
Debashis Sahoo, Charles K.F. Chan
Correspondence
thambrosi@ucdavis.edu (T.H.A.),
longaker@stanford.edu (M.T.L.),
dsahoo@ucsd.edu (D.S.)
In brief
Ambrosi and colleagues proﬁle human
skeletal stem cells (hSSCs) across ten
fetal skeletal sites and from patients
throughout adulthood, identifying,
mapping, and functionally testing four
distinct hSSC subtypes. Skeletal aging
and disease are characterized by a
dominant ﬁbrogenic hSSC variant, but
targeting deﬁned gene regulatory
networks reinstates functional hSSC
diversity.
Ambrosi et al., 2025, Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823
May 1, 2025 ª 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2025.02.013
ll
Resource
Human skeletal development and regeneration
are shaped by functional diversity of stem cells
across skeletal sites
Thomas H. Ambrosi,1,2,3,17,* Sahar Taheri,4 Kun Chen,1 Rahul Sinha,2 Yuting Wang,1,2,3,5 Ethan J. Hunt,1
L. Henry Goodnough,6 Matthew P. Murphy,2,3,7 Holly M. Steininger,2,3 Malachia Y. Hoover,2,3 Franco Felix,2
Kelly C. Weldon,1 Lauren S. Koepke,2,3 Jan Sokol,2,3 Daniel Dan Liu,2 Liming Zhao,2,3,5 Stephanie D. Conley,2 Wan-Jin Lu,2
Maurizio Morri,8 Norma F. Neff,8 Noelle L. Van Rysselberghe,6 Erika E. Wheeler,1,9 Yongheng Wang,9 J. Kent Leach,1,9
Augustine Saiz,1 Aijun Wang,9,10,11 George P. Yang,12,16 Stuart Goodman,6 Julius A. Bishop,6 Michael J. Gardner,6
Derrick C. Wan,13 Irving L. Weissman,2,14 Michael T. Longaker,2,3,13,* Debashis Sahoo,4,15,* and Charles K.F. Chan2,3,13,16
1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, UC Davis Health, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA
2Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
3Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
4Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Jacob’s School of Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA
5Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China
6Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Stanford Hospital and Clinics, Stanford, CA 94063, USA
7Blond McIndoe Laboratories, Division of Cell Matrix Biology and Regenerative Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology,
Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK
8Chan Zuckerberg BioHub, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
9Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA
10Department of Surgery, University of California Davis Health, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA
11Institute for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA
12Department of Surgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35233, USA
13Hagey Laboratory for Pediatric Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305, USA
14Ludwig Center for Cancer Stem Cell Biology and Medicine at Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
15Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
16Deceased
17Lead contact
*Correspondence: thambrosi@ucdavis.edu (T.H.A.), longaker@stanford.edu (M.T.L.), dsahoo@ucsd.edu (D.S.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2025.02.013
SUMMARY
The skeleton is one of the most structurally and compositionally diverse organ systems in the human body,
depending on unique cellular dynamisms. Here, we integrate prospective isolation of human skeletal stem
cells (hSSCs; CD45CD235aTIE2CD31CD146PDPN+CD73+CD164+) from ten skeletal sites with func-
tional assays and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis to identify chondrogenic, osteogenic,
stromal, and ﬁbrogenic subtypes of hSSCs during development and their linkage to skeletal phenotypes.
We map the distinct composition of hSSC subtypes across multiple skeletal sites and demonstrate their
unique in vivo clonal dynamics. We ﬁnd that age-related changes in bone formation and regeneration disor-
ders stem from a pathological ﬁbroblastic shift in the hSSC pool. Utilizing a Boolean algorithm, we uncover
gene regulatory networks that dictate differences in the ability of hSSCs to generate speciﬁc skeletal tissues.
Importantly, hSSC lineage dynamics are pharmacologically malleable, providing a new strategy to treat aber-
rant hSSC diversity central to aging and skeletal maladies.
INTRODUCTION
Growth, maintenance, and regeneration of adult organ tissues
require the constant replenishment of mature cell types by pools
of resident stem cells. Revealing the identity and characterizing
the ontogeny of these rare self-renewing, multipotent stem cells
in different tissues could unlock the underlying biology behind
degenerative conditions, including aging and cancer. The utility
of a stem cell-centric approach to understanding disease is
best exempliﬁed by studies on hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs), which give rise to the entire blood system and which
have been revealed to play key roles in major aspects of
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025 ª 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc.
811
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
ll
OPEN ACCESS

hematopoiesis, from early development to age-related changes
in immunity and blood-borne malignancies.1,2 Recent advances
in single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis further re-
vealed previously overlooked cellular heterogeneity in HSC pop-
ulations while highlighting new aspects of their regulation by
non-hematopoietic cell types that serve as their niche.3–5
ScRNA-seq
has
also
been
applied
to
characterize
the
complexity of skeletal bone-resident niche populations in
mice6–8 and humans.9,10 Nonetheless, our understanding of hu-
man skeletal stem and progenitor cells remains limited due to a
variety
of
challenges,
including
ethical
and
experimental
accessibility.
Although functionally intertwined with HSCs, the identity of a
self-renewing, multipotent human skeletal stem cell (hSSC) has
long been elusive. Several cell populations have been proposed
to enrich stem and progenitor cell types that can create a hema-
topoiesis-supporting microenvironment but have relied on un-
speciﬁc single markers or prior in vitro expansion for functional
assessment.11,12 Using a combination of eight cell surface
markers, we recently described a distinct bona ﬁde hSSC in
the fetal growth plate capable of giving rise to bone, cartilage,
and stromal tissue.13,14 These stem cells can also be found in
fracture calluses of regenerating adult bones and show a func-
tional association with healing outcomes and decline during ag-
ing.15,16 While HSC aging and blood diseases have been attrib-
uted to aberrant clonal expansion and lineage output,17,18 which
has been causally tied to skeletal stem cell (SSC) lineage
dysfunction in mice,19,20 the underlying mechanism of hSSC
dysfunction remains to be discovered. Additionally, as multiple
skeletogenic populations have been observed in long bones of
mice,21–27 a closer examination of human bone-forming stem
cells is crucial to provide a better understanding of pathological
changes in humans that are detrimental to skeletal health. In this
study, we integrate scRNA-seq with functional, clonal, and
spatial transcriptomic analysis of hSSCs to examine them during
their development, aging, and disease states. Our ﬁndings reveal
a striking diversity in hSSCs that is strongly associated with their
speciﬁc anatomical locations. More importantly, we observe sig-
niﬁcant functional disparities among hSSCs obtained from pa-
tient samples, implying that alterations in stem cell diversity
may be directly linked to various skeletal diseases. Speciﬁcally,
we have identiﬁed an abnormal increase in ﬁbro-stromal hSSC
subtypes in cases of age-related bone loss, fracture nonunions,
and Fibrous Dysplasia (FD). This skewed stem cell population
suggests a possible pathological shift, contributing to the pro-
gression of these conditions.
RESULTS
Structural diversity in human bones is reﬂected by hSSC
diversity
To investigate stem cell diversity in the human skeleton, we
isolated
hSSCs
(CD45CD235aTIE2CD31-CD146PDPN+
CD73+CD164+) from ten skeletal sites of the developing human
fetus at the gestational age of 17–20 weeks and conducted func-
tional and single-cell transcriptional analysis (Figures 1A, S1A,
and S1B; Table S1).13,14 Using established in vitro assays, we
conﬁrmed that hSSCs of different bones and skeletal regions
displayed the potential to clonally expand and to differentiate
into osteogenic and chondrogenic lineages (Figures S1C–S1H).
However, prospectively isolated hSSCs varied in terms of their
expansion potential and their propensity to commit to either
cartilage or osteoblast fates, as indicated by proteoglycan and
calcium deposition, respectively.
In an effort to gain a deeper understanding of the genetic dif-
ferences that underpin functional variations, we performed
Smart-seq2 scRNA-seq on freshly sorted, prospectively isolated
hSSCs. We discovered that hSSCs from every location investi-
gated exhibited a minimum of 90% gene expression overlap
with our previously characterized growth plate (GP) hSSCs.
Remarkably, most core markers speciﬁc to GP hSSCs were
also present in hSSCs from all examined skeletal sites
(Figures S1I-S1K; Table S2). Additionally, our research detected
the presence of the early embryonic human skeletal progenitor
markers SOX9 and CADM1 (Figure 1B).28 However, it is worth
noting that there was minimal overlap with widely recognized
markers to enrich for human skeletal progenitor popula-
tions.11,12,29 Interestingly, two of these markers—NGFR/CD271
and MCAM/CD146—were found to be signiﬁcantly more
concentrated
in
populations
downstream
of
the
hSSC
(Figures 1B and S2B), including the transit-amplifying human
bone-cartilage stromal progenitors (hBCSPs) and committed os-
teo-stromal progenitors (hOPs).
A gene expression correlation matrix as well as dimensionality
reduction by uniform manifold approximation and projection
(UMAP) showed distinct heterogeneity between single hSSCs
from the various skeletal regions (Figures 1C and S1K). Similar
to ﬁndings in mice,22,23,30,31 phenotypic hSSCs from different
skeletal sites expressed markers reﬂecting their distinct embry-
onic origins (Figure S1L). Unbiased Leiden clustering of all
hSSCs revealed four major types representing chondrogenic,
osteogenic, stromal, and ﬁbrogenic gene expression patterns
as assessed by marker expression and pathway enrichment
analysis corresponding to their functional and regional differ-
ences (Figures 1D, 1E, and S1M–S1Q). The relative proportion
of these hSSC subtypes closely correlated with the primary
mode of ossiﬁcation known for each bone, i.e., endochondral
ossiﬁcation (chondrogenic), which depends on a cartilage tem-
plate, and direct intramembranous ossiﬁcation (osteo-stromal)
(Figures 1F and S1R). Thus, these results link transcriptional at-
tributes with functional characteristics.
In attempting to associate the transcriptomic diversity of
hSSCs from different locations with skeletal formation, we
discovered that the expression of certain genes—which, when
mutated, cause speciﬁc developmental skeletal disorders—
could be detected at the stem cell level (Figures 1G and S1S).
For instance, mutations in the gene XYLT1 have been connected
to dwarﬁsm and scoliosis. This gene was found to be highly ex-
pressed in growth plate and vertebral chondral hSSC popula-
tions. In a similar fashion, the genes CDT1 (associated with nar-
row long bones) and SEC24D (linked to craniosynostosis)
demonstrated overexpression in periosteal and cranial ﬁbro-
stromal hSSCs, respectively.
Collectively, these ﬁndings underscore the notion that while
hSSCs from various skeletal sites possess similar stem cell attri-
butes, they also exhibit diversity in their genetic and lineage
traits. This diversity likely contributes signiﬁcantly to the regional
formation, maintenance, and dysfunction of individual bones,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
812
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
which show wide variations in shape, size, and structural
composition.32
Index-sort scRNA-seq analysis reﬁnes the hSSC
lineage tree
Having observed that there are multiple subtypes of hSSCs
distributed throughout the skeleton, we then asked how these
variants are arranged within individual bones and how they
contribute to local areas of osteogenesis. Our prior work, which
examined the SSC hierarchy in the growth plate of long bones,
laid out the speciﬁc differentiation pathways of mouse SSCs
into chondrogenic, osteogenic, and ﬁbro-stromal progenitors
(Figure S2A).13,22 To better elucidate the bone-forming lineage
of hSSCs, we employed index-sorting with plate-based Smart-
seq2 scRNA-seq on prospectively isolated GP hSSCs and
their deﬁned progenitor subtypes (hBCSPs and hOPs). Using
UMAP clustering, Leiden separation, trajectory inference, and
CytoTRACE projections, we identiﬁed hierarchical lineage rela-
tionships between hSSC and hSSC-derived progenitor cell types
(Figures 2A–2D, S2B, and S2C).22 Utilizing index-sort informa-
tion, we further identiﬁed new cell surface marker combinations
that allowed us to resolve speciﬁc hSSC-derived osteogenic
progenitor cell (OPC: PDPNCD146+CD73) and stromal pro-
genitor cell (SPC: PDPNCD146hiCD73low) subsets from the
hOP population (PDPNCD146+) (Figures 2E, S2D, and S2E).
In support of this ﬁnding, prospectively isolated OPCs were high-
ly osteogenic compared with SPCs in vitro and in vivo
(Figures 2F, S2F, and S2G). Furthermore, utilizing our scRNA-
seq-based lineage reconstruction together with our previously
published single-cell data of micro-dissected sections of the
growth plate zones and the adjacent diaphysis,13 we were able
to spatially map the lineage hierarchy from fetal hSSCs to
preBCSPs, BCSPs, and their committed OPC and SPC down-
stream subsets. Thus, GP hSSCs exhibit a unique sequential dif-
ferentiation pattern stretching from the epiphysis to the diaph-
ysis. This differentiation process generates a clearly organized
stratiﬁcation of hSSC-derived progenitors within the maturing
growth plate (Figures S2H–S2K).
Since scRNA-seq data inferred the existence of four hSSC
subtypes (Figures 1D and 1E), we wondered if they could also
be identiﬁed based on our existing ﬂow cytometric panel for
prospective isolation and functional characterization. Since
index-sort analysis of the cartilaginous fetal growth plate skel-
etal lineage suggested mostly moderate CD73 and CD164
Figure 1. Human bone development and disorders are rooted in distinct hSSC diversity
(A) Schematic overview of fetal skeletal tissue compartments processed for scRNA-seq of hSSCs.
(B) Dotplot showing gene expression of reported skeletal stem and progenitor (prog.) marker genes in hSSCs across skeletal sites.
(C) Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) plot of 2,754 single fetal hSSCs.
(D) Corresponding Leiden subclustering of all fetal hSSCs.
(E) Speciﬁed Leiden subclusters with marker genes.
(F) Distribution of fetal skeletal tissue-speciﬁc hSSCs in Leiden subclusters.
(G) Selected differentially expressed genes associated with genetic disorders with bone phenotypes as detected in scRNA-seq data of hSSCs from different
Leiden clusters. Bottom: Matrixplot showing selected genes associated with developmental skeletal disorders and their expression in site-speciﬁc hSSCs.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
813

expression levels in hSSCs (Figure 2E), we further subdivided
the double-positive hSSC fraction from pooled fetal long
bones, vertebrae, and cranium into four subpopulations with
varying CD73/CD164 expression intensity and prospectively
isolated them for quantitative PCR analysis. We found that
scRNA-seq
gene
expression
matched
CD164lowCD73low
(chondrogenic), CD164highCD73low (osteogenic), CD164high
CD73high (stromal), and CD164lowCD73high (ﬁbrogenic) hSSC
populations (Figures S2L and S2M). Based on these cell sur-
face marker proﬁles, and as suggested by scRNA-seq, ﬂow
cytometric analysis demonstrated that growth plate and
vertebral hSSCs mainly contained the chondrogenic subtype
while periosteum (PE) and cranial hSSCs were highly enriched
for stromal hSSCs (Figure 2G). To test the plasticity of the
hSSC subtype composition, we challenged hSSCs from
different skeletal source tissues with a pro-osteogenic differ-
entiation cocktail, which was sufﬁcient to generate large pro-
portions of the osteogenic hSSC subtype independent of
original variant distribution at the four skeletal sites (Fig-
ure S2N). We independently conﬁrmed bona ﬁde SSC proper-
ties for each hSSC subtype by prospectively isolating them
and performing in vivo ossicle formation assays. Both ﬂow cy-
tometric and histological analyses conﬁrmed the self-renewal
and multilineage differentiation capacity of all four hSSCs
subtypes in this setting (Figures 2H and 2I). Altogether,
these results conﬁrm scRNA-seq data, tying distinct but
Figure 2. The reﬁned hSSC lineage tree contains four distinct hSSC subtypes
(A) ForceAtlas2 projection of scRNA-seq data from previously deﬁned and prospectively isolated human skeletal lineage populations (885 cells). hSSC, human
skeletal stem cell (175 cells); hBCSP, human bone-cartilage-stromal progenitor cell (369 cells); hOP, human osteoprogenitor (341 cells).
(B) Unbiased Leiden clustering of the same cells with annotation of putative cell types.
(C) Pseudotime trajectory inference of scRNA-seq data from prospectively isolated hSSC lineage populations.
(D) Leiden cluster-speciﬁc marker expression.
(E) Index-sort analysis of scRNA-seq data from skeletal lineage populations colored by Leiden subclusters.
(F) In vitro (top) and in vivo (bottom) osteogenesis of freshly puriﬁed sorted OPCs (PDPNCD146+CD73), and SPCs (PDPNCD146hiCD73low) stained with
alizarin red S.
(G) Representative ﬂow cytometric plots of fetal tissue from four skeletal sites showing distinct hSSC subtype distribution within phenotypic hSSC gate
(CD45CD235aCD31TIE2PDPN+CD146CD73+CD164+). Below: composition (%) of hSSC subtypes within phenotypic hSSC gate.
(H) Flow cytometric analysis of 4-week ossicles derived from the four distinct hSSC subtypes.
(I) Representative alizarin red S staining and immunohistological staining supporting osteogenic (hOCN), chondrogenic (hCOL2A1), and stromal (hCD146) output
(HNA, human nuclear antigen; hOCN, osteocalcin; hCOL2A1, collagen 2A1; DAPI, nuclei) of sections from 8-week in vivo ossicles derived from prospectively
isolated hSSC subtype populations. Scale bars, 50 mm.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
814
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
malleable hSSC subtype distribution to various skeletal sites
(Figure S2O).
Spatially mapped region-speciﬁc hSSC diversity is
controlled by distinct clonal dynamics
To spatially resolve hSSC subtype distribution, we ﬁrst investi-
gated the distinct differences in GP and PE hSSC diversity (Fig-
ure S3). We integrated scRNA-seq data of hSSCs from dissected
growth plate and periosteal regions as well as non-dissected long
bones, which contained both anatomical sublocations. Gene
expression by unbiased clustering again showed that PE hSSCs
predominantly consist of ﬁbrous and stromal subtypes, while
GP hSSCs are mainly chondrogenic (Figures 3A–3C and S3A–
S3F). We then conducted spatial transcriptomic analysis of a fetal
phalange using Nanostring’s CosMx platform with a universal
1,000 human genes panel, which together with the CellCharter al-
gorithm33 successfully mapped individual cells to speciﬁc subre-
gions (Figures 3D, 3E, S3L, and S3M). Since we observed that the
two long bone hSSC subtypes share expression of common
markers (Figures 3C and S1I), we estimated hSSC locations and
distribution throughout the long bone by identifying SOX9+
PDGFRA+ cells in the CosMx dataset. Indeed, the majority of
SOX9+PDGFRA+ cells could be found in growth plate and PE re-
gions, while they were not present in the bone marrow (Figures 3F,
3G, and S3N). In accordance with Smart-seq2 results of hSSC
subtypes, SOX9+PDGFRA+ cells in the growth plate expressed
markers associated with endochondral ossiﬁcation, while cells
labeled in the periosteum were enriched for genes related to intra-
membranous ossiﬁcation (Figure 3H). This was also consistent
with the inference of speciﬁc ligand-receptor interactions with
other cell types in the vicinity of labeled hSSCs (Figures 3I, 3J,
and S3O) as well as potential longer-distance crosstalk between
hSSC subtypes (Figures S3G–S3K). Altogether, these results esti-
mate the spatial distribution of long bone hSSCs in situ and
conﬁrm distinct molecular differences of identiﬁed regional
subtypes.
We then mined our Smart-seq2 datasets to identify distinct
markers that could be used to approximate the anatomical orga-
nization of the newly identiﬁed hSSC subtypes across different
skeletal sites. Conﬁrming CosMx results, RNA in situ hybridiza-
tion for SKI like proto-oncogene (SKIL) with co-staining of
hSSC marker podoplanin (PDPN) localized the chondrogenic
hSSC subtype primarily to the resting and proliferative zones of
the growth plate and veriﬁed the presence of HIC ZBTB tran-
scriptional repressor 1 (HIC1)-expressing stromal hSSCs along
the periosteum (Figures 4A–4C, S1J, S4A, and S4B). When map-
ping out the in situ distribution of all four hSSC subtypes (i.e.,
chondrogenic [SKIL+PDPN+], osteogenic [secreted phospho-
protein 1, SPP1+PDPN+], stromal [HIC1+PDPN+], and ﬁbrogenic
[Flavin containing monooxygenase 1, FMO1+PDPN+]) across
long bones, vertebrae, and the cranium, we could validate their
overall prevalence as predicted by scRNA-seq (Figures S4A–
S4G). While we found chondrogenic and osteogenic hSSC sub-
types in the metaphysis close to newly forming trabecular bone,
as well as sparsely across periosteal tissue, none of the four sub-
types were present in the diaphyseal bone marrow space, in
close alignment with CosMx data. Our analysis therefore sug-
gests
that
cells
previously
classiﬁed
as
(bone
marrow)
Figure 3. Single-cell spatial mapping of fetal long bone hSSCs
(A) UMAP of scRNA-seq data of 616 prospectively isolated growth plate (GP; 172 cells) hSSCs, periosteum (PE; 78 cells) hSSCs, and hSSCs from non-dissected
long bone tissue (GP + PE; 366 cells).
(B) Unbiased Leiden clustering of the same dataset.
(C) Selected gene expression of hSSC-enriched markers in Leiden populations.
(D) Nanostring CosMx spatial transcriptomic analysis of a fetal phalange bone section with single cells clustered using CellCharter.
(E) Marker genes of the subpopulations identiﬁed by CellCharter.
(F) Expression of genes enriched in hSSCs in different clusters.
(G) Human SSC-enriched population detected by co-expression of SOX9 and PDGFRA shown as distribution across fetal bone. Fraction of hSSCs per cell cluster
shown in pie chart. Speciﬁc subregions enriched for SOX9+PDGFRA+ cells are demarcated.
(H) Distinct gene expression of SOX9+PDGFRA+ cells in GP and PE subregions.
(I) CellPhoneDB ligand-receptor interactions inference between SOX9+PDGFRA+ and surrounding cells.
(J) Expression of selected ligands in SOX9+PDGFRA+ cells in subregions as well as expression of respective receptors in surrounding cells. Scale bar, 1 mm.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
815

mesenchymal stromal cells (BMSCs) are cell types distinct from
hSSCs. BMSCs likely consist of perivascular cells (e.g., TIE2+)
that could include lineage cells derived from hSSCs. The mostly
chondrogenic vertebral hSSCs were highly abundant speciﬁcally
at the growth plate area of vertebral bodies and concentric to the
nucleus pulposus, spanning most of the annulus ﬁbrosus of the
vertebral disc (Figures S4C and S4D). By contrast, stromal and
osteogenic hSSC subtypes were abundant in frontal and parietal
skull regions of the cranium (Figures S4E and S4F). FMO1-ex-
pressing ﬁbrogenic hSSCs were highly prevalent throughout cra-
nial suture tissue but less in periosteal and parietal skull regions,
while they were almost undetectable in growth plate, vertebra,
and frontal skull regions (Figure S4G). Combined, these results
connect transcriptomic, functional, and histological readouts of
hSSC subtype diversity.
To study the differentiation dynamics of individual hSSCs from
the growth plate and periosteum, we developed a clonal barcod-
ing approach. This strategy allows us to trace the differentiation
paths of individual genetically barcoded hSSCs in vivo (see
STAR Methods). The single-cell readouts conﬁrmed distinctive
differentiation outcomes between GP and PE hSSCs. As ex-
pected from our hSSC subtype analysis, both hSSC populations
demonstrated robust self-renewal capacity yet showed signiﬁ-
cant differences in their formation of cartilage, bone, and ﬁbro-
stromal progenitors on the single-cell level (Figures 4D–4G and
S4H–S4M). For instance, growth plate-associated hSSCs mainly
contribute to the development of both cartilage and osteo-stro-
mal tissues, playing a critical role in facilitating the longitudinal
growth of bones. By contrast, hSSCs found in the periosteum
predominantly generate ﬁbro-stromal lineages, providing tough-
ness and ﬂexibility to the cortical bones. Thus, the speciﬁc
anatomical locations of hSSCs are crucial in maintaining the
overall structure of bone. Importantly, when either of these spe-
ciﬁc hSSC harboring areas are eliminated through microsurgery,
the overall development of long bones is signiﬁcantly impaired
(Figures S4N and S4O). This demonstrates the vital role these
specialized hSSCs play for bone structure and growth. Alto-
gether, these results indicate that just as different bones contain
varying ratios of hSSC variants, different subtypes of hSSCs are
distributed in unique domains within a long bone. Therefore,
these studies underline the crucial role of location in the function
of different hSSC subtypes within human bone tissue.
Figure 4. Regional-speciﬁc hSSC diversity is reﬂected in distinct clonal dynamics
(A) Gene expression of hSSC subtype-speciﬁc markers SKIL (Chondro.), SPP1 (Osteo.), HIC1 (Stromal), and FMO1 (Fibro.) in UMAP of scRNA-seq data from GP
and PE hSSCs.
(B) In situ validation of hSSC subtype marker expression in fetal long bone growth plate (left) and periosteum (right) using RNAScope. DAPI, nuclear stain; RZ,
resting zone; PZ, proliferative zone; PHZ, pre-hypertrophic zone; HZ, hypertrophic zone; EN, endosteal site. Inserts show co-staining with hSSC marker po-
doplanin (PDPN).
((C) H&E staining of fetal long bone (left) and RNA in situ hybridization-based distribution of overall prevalence of hSSC subtypes (bottom). GP, growth plate; MP,
metaphysis; PE, periosteum; PC, perichondrium.
(D) UMAP with RNA velocity of Leiden clustered scRNA-seq data from barcoded GP-hSSC-derived grafts (left) and barcoded PE-hSSC-derived grafts (right).
SSC, skeletal stem cell; BCSP, bone-cartilage-stromal progenitor; CH, chondrogenic; OS, osteo-stromal; FS, ﬁbro-stromal. n = 3 grafts per group.
(E) Distribution of single-cell-derived cells within UMAP Leiden clusters from two selected GP-hSSC clones (left) and for two selected PE-hSSC clones (right).
(F) The top 3 most abundant clones per hSSC site of origin and their relative cell type contributions based on Leiden clusters.
(G) Overall detected clonal cell type output of barcoded GP (n = 46) and PE (n = 21) hSSCs. Scale bars, 50 mm.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
816
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
Skeletal aging and loss of regenerative activity are tied
to changes in hSSC diversity
Previous studies have linked aging with decreased skeletal
regeneration.15,19,34 Our in-depth investigation of age-related
changes in hSSCs found that, throughout adulthood, these cells
retain the highest potential for osteochondrogenic development
in vitro compared with other cell types (Figure S5A). However, an
analysis of 407 patient-derived fracture callus specimens
demonstrated a signiﬁcant decrease in hSSC frequency with
advanced age (Figure S5B). Functional in vitro and in vivo assays
conducted on hSSCs isolated from 270 of these patients re-
vealed diminished clonogenicity and bone/cartilage-forming po-
tential in older patients (Figures 5A, 5B, and S5C–S5E). Subcu-
taneous transplants of hSSCs from geriatric donors into young
mice yielded ossicles that showed signiﬁcantly reduced mineral-
ization compared with hSSCs from young patients (Figures 5C
and 5D). This was in line with a sex-independent age-related
pattern of reduced hSSC frequency and expansion potential,
with male donor cells showing a signiﬁcant negative correlation
in colony-forming unit-ﬁbroblast (CFU-F) capacity with age.
The negative correlation of increasing age and bone formation
potential was also independent of the patient’s sex and body
mass index (BMI) (Figures S5F and S5G).
Using functional readouts and scRNA-seq, we found that poor
fracture healing, which predominantly occurs in older patients
and can result in nonunions, was associated with the formation
of ﬁbrogenic tissue instead of mineralized fracture callus
(Figures 5E and S5H–S5J).35 Surprisingly, hSSC numbers were
increased in nonunion fracture tissue, but these cells exhibited
deﬁcient osteogenesis, indicating a link between impaired
hSSC differentiation and compromised bone regeneration. The
results demonstrate that hSSCs from older patients primarily
generate ﬁbro-stromal tissue, suggesting that dysfunction in
hSSCs could underlie pathologically shifted ﬁbrogenic lineage
dynamics, thereby impacting the major stem cell source for frac-
ture repair.
To gain a better understanding of the biological and molecular
differences in young, aged, and nonunion adult hSSCs, we
conducted Smart-seq2 scRNA-seq analysis of freshly puriﬁed
long bone fracture callus site-derived hSSCs from 20 patients
(Table S1) along with evaluation of their osteogenic potential
(Figures 5F and S5K). Based on our functional readouts, we hy-
pothesized that higher age favored ﬁbro-stromal differentiation
of fracture hSSCs, thereby preventing proper mineralization at
the healing site. This was reminiscent of the phenotype found in
bones of patients with FD, a genetic disease caused by an
Figure 5. Human skeletal aging and impaired regeneration are tied to a ﬁbro-stromal shift due to loss of hSSC diversity
(A) Representative X-ray images of a healing acute long bone fracture (FX) with visible fracture callus (left). Acute fracture and follow-up X-ray images of an
unhealed nonunion (right).
(B) Association of patient age and in vitro mineralization capacity of phenotypic hSSCs (n = 219). Correlations assessed by Spearman test.
(C) 4-week-old subcutaneous grafts derived from young and geriatric donor hSSCs showing degree of mineralization by micro-CT (left) and Movat pentachrome
staining for graft tissue composition (MS, matrix scaffold, white; Bo, bone, yellow; Ca, cartilage, green; FS, ﬁbrogenic stroma, red).
(D) Quantiﬁcation of mineralization of patient hSSC-derived grafts. n = 5 per age group. Y: young <35 years; G: geriatric >65 years. Data shown as mean +
standard deviation of the mean (SEM). Signiﬁcance assessed by two-tailed t test with Welch’s correction.
(E) In vitro osteogenic potential of hSSCs from acute fractures (n = 219) versus nonunion tissue (n = 15). Data shown as mean + SEM. Signiﬁcance assessed by
Mann-Whitney test.
(F) Smart-seq2 plate-based scRNA-seq analysis of 1,957 freshly isolated fetal long bone and patient hSSCs and their UMAP clustering. FD, Fibrous Dysplasia;
NU, nonunion; PE, periosteum.
(G) Flow cytometry plots of freshly processed human patient tissue stained and gated for phenotypic hSSCs showing subtype composition based on CD73/
CD164 marker expression with bar graph quantitation below.
(H) Correlation matrix of hSSCs grouped by distinct donor groups.
(I) Grouping of hSSCs in UMAP based on combined unbiased Leiden clustering and in vitro functional readout.
(J) Dotplot showing selected genes and their expression in the three hierarchically clustered subtypes separating functional states of hSSCs.
(K) Boolean relationships of Boolean equivalent correlated clusters (BECCs) inferred dysfunctional hSSC gene TAGLN and its global relationship with COL2A1
(top, left) and ACTA2 (bottom, left) as well as its expression relationships in single-cell hSSC dataset (right). Scale bars, 30 mm.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
817

activating Gs alpha mutation resulting in softened bones and gen-
eration of ﬁbrotic marrow that has been linked to stem cell
dysfunction.36,37 Thus, we also isolated phenotypic hSSCs from
a patient with FD. We found a high prevalence of phenotypic
hSSCs in FD bone. However, like nonunion hSSCs, FD hSSCs
failed to undergo osteogenesis and displayed strong expression
of ﬁbroblastic genes and myﬁbroblastic proteins such as smooth
muscle alpha-actin (aSMA/ACTA2) (Figures S5L and S5M). Strik-
ingly, functional readouts of patient hSSCs were reﬂected in
distinct hSSC subtype composition detected in patient samples
(Figure 5G), i.e., higher prevalence of the osteochondrogenic
hSSC subtypes in bone-forming hSSCs compared with ﬁbro-stro-
mal subtype abundance in dysfunctional skeletal tissues. In sup-
port of that, the hSSCs from donors with pro-ﬁbrogenic features,
i.e., nonunion, FD, and aged PE, showed strong transcriptomic
correlation (Figure 5H). Additionally, young osteogenic hSSCs
(fetal and patients <35 years) showed higher developmental po-
tential, as predicted by CytoTRACE, and lower expression of my-
oﬁbroblastic genes compared with aged, nonunion, aged PE, and
FD hSSCs (Figures S5N–S5P). Intriguingly, as we have previously
shown that osteogenic differentiation performance of hSSCs can
be a predictor of fracture union even in young patients,16 we found
that in vitro mineralization capacity assessed by alizarin red stain-
ing and ﬁbrogenic gene marker expression strongly correlated
with hierarchical clustering of single hSSCs (Figure S5Q and
S5R). Indeed, hSSCs from a 28-year-old patient failed to miner-
alize in culture and clustered closely with pro-ﬁbrogenic nonunion
and FD hSSCs, similar to PE hSSCs from a 65-year-old patient. To
investigate the deﬁning properties of different hSSC types more
easily, we grouped cells into functional (osteochondrogenic),
impaired, and dysfunctional (pro-ﬁbrogenic) hSSCs based on un-
biased Leiden separation and functional readouts (Figures 5I and
S5S). While stem cell marker expression was mostly conserved
throughout functional groups, top regulated genes were shifted
from skeletal system development in functional hSSCs to positive
regulation of ﬁbroblast differentiation and regulation of smooth
muscle cell proliferation in impaired and dysfunctional hSSCs
(Figures 5J, S5S, and S5T). Taken together, these results support
the notion that pro-ﬁbroblastic shifts in hSSC diversity are a major
pathological mechanism of stem cell dysfunction in bones, which
might create an imbalance in skeletal homeostasis resulting in
impaired regenerative capacity.
Finally, since our observations revealed a shift toward ﬁbro-
blast-skewed hSSCs in aging, nonunions, and FD, it prompted
the question of whether this shift is a common mechanism in
skeletal disorders. The ﬁbroblast marker aSMA/ACTA2 was
found to be overexpressed in FD and nonunion hSSCs. To
identify a universal biomarker that could potentially diagnose
an impaired skeletal tissue state, we employed computational
Boolean equivalent correlated clusters (BECCs) using a data-
base of nearly 26,000 public gene expression datasets.38,39
This approach identiﬁed 25 genes, including the well-known
ﬁbroblast markers transgelin (TAGLN) and myosin light-chain
9 (MYL9), as potential markers of ﬁbroblast-skewed hSSCs
due to their high correlation with each other and ACTA2—
the seed gene (Figure S5U).40 Single-cell transcriptomic data
conﬁrmed the speciﬁc expression of these markers in ﬁbro-
stromal fetal hSSC subtypes as well as in impaired aged,
FD, and nonunion hSSCs (Figures S5P, S5V, and S5W).
Remarkably, TAGLN, a pro-ﬁbrotic gene, showed a high-to-
low correlation with osteochondrogenic marker genes (e.g.,
COL2A1 and SOX5), emphasizing the inverse Boolean rela-
tionship between these two gene programs (Figure 5K, S5X,
and S5Y). Analysis of publicly available human gene expres-
sion datasets revealed low expression of TAGLN and MYL9
in fetal hSSCs, growth plate zone cells, and freshly isolated
bone marrow stromal cells from healthy adults.13 However,
these markers were highly abundant in tissue samples from
various ﬁbro- and osteosarcomas.41 Notably, TAGLN was a
better biomarker than MYL9 for osteoporotic and osteoar-
thritic bone tissue (Figure S5Z). In sum, our ﬁndings sugg-
est an expansion of ﬁbroblast-skewed hSSCs in multiple
skeletal pathologies. Thus, shifts toward higher proportions
of this hSSC subtype may serve as an indicator of poor
bone health.
Combinatorial targeting of gene regulatory networks to
preserve hSSC diversity
Noticing considerable transcriptomic differences between func-
tional and dysfunctional hSSCs, we sought to identify the gene
regulatory mechanisms that inﬂuence their identities. We used
an innovative approach, an invariant analysis of Boolean implica-
tion relationships, across 25,955 human microarrays from
various tissues and developed a new workﬂow integrating
scRNA-seq data from healthy/osteochondrogenic and dysfunc-
tional/ﬁbrogenic
hSSC
subtypes
(Figures
S6A–S6I;
STAR
Methods for a detailed description).
Initially, we created a comprehensive Boolean implication
network (BIN) using the most differentially expressed and com-
mon skeletal markers in hSSCs, revealing fundamental global
gene expression relationships (Figures 6A and S6J). To simplify
this, we identiﬁed BIN subnets (pathways) and employed high-
level mathematical modeling to predict the gene regulation or-
ders that linked pro-ﬁbrogenic genes in dysfunctional hSSCs
to genes expressed in functional hSSCs. Intriguingly, our results
indicated that genes associated with the hedgehog (Hh) pathway
(IHH, PHOSPHO1) had distinct Boolean relationships with ﬁbro-
genic genes (ACTA2 and TAGLN), which were closely connected
to bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling (BMPR1A and
ACVRL1) (Figure 6B). Consistent with the vital role of Hh
signaling in limb development and its deﬁciency as a factor in
diabetic bone disease, functional hSSCs exhibited higher
expression of genes within this pathway compared with their
dysfunctional
ﬁbrogenic
counterparts
(Figure
S6K).42,43
Conversely, excess BMP and heightened transforming growth
factor beta (TGF-b) signaling are linked with ﬁbrosis and bone
loss.44,45
We then applied the BoolTraineR (BTR) models, based on
Smart-seq2 scRNA-seq data, to the selected subnets to identify
dynamic Boolean circuits on a single-cell level (Figure 6C).46 The
results highlighted an unforeseen complexity in gene regulation.
They suggested the necessity of an activating SOX9-FERMT1-
IHH gene regulatory loop in osteogenic hSSCs while simulta-
neously
preventing
suppression
by
excessive
inhibitory
BMPR1A-related gene programs. This was achieved through
the tight control of PHOSPHO1 expression to favor osteochon-
drogenic over ﬁbrogenic cell states. To test this functionally,
we used the small molecules SAG21k, which stimulates Hh
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
818
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
Figure 6. Boolean-logic-guided combinatorial targeting of gene regulatory networks restores hSSC diversity
(A) Schematic of workﬂow for invariant analysis of single-cell data from functional and dysfunctional patient hSSCs based on Boolean implication relationships.
(B) Selected BIN pathways and high-level mathematical model of gene regulation in hSSCs with predicted orders of activation. Gene relationships indicated by
color of arrows. Green, hi-hi; red, hi-lo; blue, lo-lo.
(C) BoolTraineR (BTR) model of a gene regulatory network of hSSCs based on a selected pathway identiﬁed by BIN to capture dynamic Boolean circuit-
based model.
(D) Representative alizarin red S staining of in vitro osteogenic assays on patient-derived fracture (Fx) hSSCs either treated with DMSO as control or small
molecules dorsomorphin homolog 1 (DMH1), smoothened agonist 21k (SAG), and a combination of DMH1 and SAG.
(E) Quantiﬁcation of in vitro osteogenic assays with small molecule treatments on hSSCs from seven patients. Insert shows quantiﬁcation of combined patient
hSSCs relative to combinatorial DMH1 + SAG treatment. Data shown as mean + standard deviation of the mean (SEM). Two-tailed Student’s t test versus
combinatorial treatment with Welch’s correction or Mann-Whitney test to correct for unequal variances or non-normality. n = 14 from independent duplicates of
seven patient hSSCs.
(F) Representative mCT images of 8-week grafts derived from transplanted patient hSSCs either treated with DMSO (control) or DMH1 + SAG. Top left insert
shows bright-ﬁeld image of grafts. No hSSC graft shown in the top right insert of control.
(G) Representative H&E staining of graft sections. MS, matrix scaffold; Bo, bone; FS, ﬁbro/stroma; Hem, hematopoietic.
(H) Quantiﬁcation of hSSC grafts either treated with DMSO or combinatorial cocktail. Two-tailed paired Wilcoxon test (n = 6).
(I) Representative micro-CT and saffranin-O staining images of fracture calluses with hSSC transplants with or without factors at day 21 after bi-cortical fracture.
Ca, cartilage.
(J) Micro-CT-based analysis of fractional bone volume in formed callus.
(K) Immunohistochemistry identifying hSSC-derived cells stained for human nuclear antigen (HNA, red) and osteocalcin (OCN, green) in fracture callus tissue of
different experimental groups.
(L) Quantiﬁcation of HNA and OCN double-positive cells across calluses. All fracture callus analyses n = 4–5 per group. Data shown as box-plots with min to max.
One-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test. Scale bars, 50 mm.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
819

through smoothened activation, and dorsomorphin homolog 1
(DMH1), which selectively blocks BMP signaling to prevent the
upregulation of ﬁbrogenic genes. Based on our Boolean anal-
ysis, we hypothesized that a combined treatment with these
molecules could restore hSSC bone-forming hSSC subtype
composition
in
dysfunctional
stem
cells.
In
vitro
testing
conﬁrmed that the combined application of SAG21k and
DMH1 to primary patient hSSCs elevated IHH and SOX9 expres-
sion while downregulating BMPR1A and TAGLN (Figure S6L).
Importantly, these small molecules signiﬁcantly enhanced the
osteogenesis of patient hSSCs if applied together (Figures 6D
and 6E). For in vivo testing, we ﬁrst transplanted patient-derived
hSSCs encapsulated in Matrigel with acellular bone matrix,
alongside SAG21k and DMH1, subcutaneously into immunode-
ﬁcient NOD scid gamma (NSG) mice (Figure S6M). The com-
bined treatment signiﬁcantly improved ossicle formation with
higher mineralized content compared with controls. While frac-
ture hSSCs responded most efﬁciently, this dual regimen also
enhanced bone formation in hSSCs isolated from tendon, carti-
lage,
and
metaphyseal
bone
marrow
of
aged
donors
(Figures 6F–6H). Finally, we transplanted gels encapsulating
hSSCs with or without SAG21k/DMH1 around the injury site of
NSG mice with a bi-cortical femoral fracture to determine cellular
output of human cells and healing outcome (Figure S6N). Flow
cytometric analysis of day-10 callus tissue identiﬁed donor
hSSCs enriched for the chondrogenic subtype contributing to
multiple skeletal lineages during the endochondral ossiﬁcation
process (Figure S6O). Micro-computed tomography (CT) and
immunohistology of day-14 callus tissue further demonstrated
the osteochondrogenic contributions of donor hSSCs during
healing and importantly signiﬁcantly increased mineralization
through enhanced bone and cartilage output from hSSCs stimu-
lated
by
SAG21K+DMH1
but
not
mono-treated
groups
compared with hSSC-only controls (Figures 6I–6L and S6P–
S6R). In summary, we have pioneered a novel approach to
gene regulatory network analysis based on Boolean logic, in-
ferred from scRNA-seq data of hSSCs. This surpasses tradi-
tional methods that only infer transcription factor interactions
(Figure S6S). Utilizing this advanced technique, we identiﬁed
speciﬁc small molecules that can reinstate functional diversity
of non-osteochondrogenic, dysfunctional hSSCs.
DISCUSSION
Our study provides a unique view into human skeletal develop-
ment, aging, and disease from the perspective of highly pure
hSSCs. We have found that individual hSSCs vary in their capac-
ity for expansion, self-renewal, and differentiation into bone,
cartilage, and ﬁbro-stromal cells but do not generate fat cells.
Our research shows that while hSSCs derived from different
skeletal sites display high transcriptomic similarity, each bone
hosts a unique diversity of hSSC subtypes with distinct clonal
dynamics. This diversity appears to be vital for shaping and
maintaining bone tissue throughout life. We identiﬁed four major
types of hSSCs, which exhibit over 90% transcriptional similar-
ity. Interestingly, different variants of hSSCs are dispersed in
distinct areas of the bone, providing the bone with a ‘‘positional
memory’’ regarding its compositional architecture. The strategic
interspersion of ﬁbro-stromal and osteochondrogenic hSSCs in
speciﬁc ratios might be crucial for achieving the right balance be-
tween ﬂexibility and rigidity in bone structure, similar to the use of
rebars and cement in reinforced concrete. Moreover, we found a
particular directionality in the clonal propagation of skeletal pro-
genitors derived from hSSCs within a bone. This is likely critical
for shaping the skeleton and determining its structural character-
istics during development and growth. Disruptions in genes
associated with major hSSC subtypes are often linked to genetic
diseases.
One of our key observations was that ﬁbroblast-skewed
hSSCs tend to increase under various pathological conditions,
an occurrence reminiscent of age-related myeloid skewing by
HSCs.2 This led us to consider whether the skewing of HSCs
and hSSCs in humans is interconnected, perhaps through
communication between the hematopoietic and skeletal com-
partments.19,20 It would also be worthwhile to explore if certain
point mutations, such as those found in clonal hematopoiesis
of indeterminate potential (CHIP), could lead to the expansion
of ﬁbroblast-skewed hSSCs over time. Alternatively, these
clones might already exist but become dominant during aging
or in response to co-morbidities such as diabetes.17 Fibro-
blast-skewed hSSCs are signiﬁcantly less osteogenic than os-
teochondral hSSCs. Their pathological expansion results in
poor ossiﬁcation and bone healing. Understanding why aging
promotes overexpansion of ﬁbrogenic hSSCs could shed light
on the interplay between aging, disease, and skeletal health.
Given that ﬁbroblast-skewed hSSCs expansion seems to be a
common pathological mechanism in the skeleton, and ﬁbrosis
is a typical aging hallmark associated with altered ﬁbroblast
composition, our identiﬁcation of diverse hSSC subtypes
deﬁned by distinct but tunable gene regulatory networks offers
a new perspective for designing effective strategies against skel-
etal aging and disease.47
Limitations of the study
Our studies of human tissues are bound by ethical consider-
ations and limited by the available specimens. Here, we
collected samples from fetal donors at gestational ages 17–
20 weeks to capture the role of hSSCs during the early establish-
ment of the skeleton. Similarly, our patient cohort specimens
came from skeletally mature healthy and diseased donors be-
tween 18 and 77 years of age, mostly collected from fracture
sites. Future work will have to ﬁll the gap by adding hSSC data
from a broader spectrum of fetal stages and intact adult skeletal
tissue, e.g., warm autopsies, as well as pre-pubertal to adoles-
cent age groups to achieve a comprehensive compendium of
hSSCs throughout all life stages.
Given the need for prospective isolation of human cell popula-
tions for functional assessment and the lack of elegant in vivo ge-
netic perturbation approaches commonly possible in murine
models, we draw our conclusion from a collective of multiple af-
ﬁrming readouts. Reﬁnement of in vivo clonal tracking strategies
allowing simultaneous 3D multiplexed niche analysis will pave
the way for a more granular understanding of hSSC lineage dy-
namics in vivo. Our generated single-cell datasets, in combina-
tion with related data generated by other groups, will also allow
for the identiﬁcation of additional markers that could further pu-
rify our already exceedingly homogeneous hSSC populations
and their lineage tree.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
820
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be
directed to the lead contact, T.H. Ambrosi (thambrosi@ucdavis.edu).
Materials availability
This study did not generate any unique reagents.
Data and code availability
All scRNA-seq raw data and count ﬁles were deposited in the Gene Expression
Omnibus as a SuperSeries under accessionnumber GEO:GSE234040. Publicly
available data used in this manuscript were sourced from SRA: PRJNA478935
and as speciﬁed in ﬁgures and ﬁgure legends. All code for new analyses
pipelines presented in this manuscript has been deposited at GitHub for re-
creating analyses (https://github.com/sahoo00/Invariant-Circuits, https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.14823193,
v1.0.1)
and
https://github.com/sahoo00/
Clonetracker, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14823191, v1.0.1).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Gina Ford and C. Queen for administrative and lab management, the
Stanford University Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine
FACS core (NIH S10 RR02933801) for experimental support, and NIH S10
1S10OD028493-01A1 (Principal Investigator: Charles K.F. Chan). Special thanks
go to Lolita Penland, Brian Yu, and Rose Yan from the Chan Zuckerberg Biohub
for support with scRNA-seq. We also thank the Stanford Gene Expression Facil-
ity (PAN Facility) for contributing to this project. This work was supported by NIH-
NIA K99/R00 AG049958-01A1, Stanford Wu Tsai Human Performance Alliance
Funds, Siebel Foundation, the Heritage Medical Foundation, Prostate Cancer
Foundation, the American Federation for Aging Research-Arthritis National
Research Foundation (AFAR-ANRF), a soft launch grant by the Chan Zuckerberg
Biohub, a seed grant from the WHSDM Stanford Women’s Health and Sex Dif-
ferences in Medicine Center, and an endowment from the DiGenova Family to
C.K.F.C.; NIH grants K99/R00 CA151673, R01 GM138385, UG3 TR002968,
UG3 TR003355, and R01 AI155696 to D.S.; PSRF to M.P.M.; and the German
Research Foundation (DFG-Fellowship) 399915929 and NIH-NIA K99/R00
AG066963 as well as U01 AG086165 to T.H.A. Support for T.H.A. and A.S.
also came from the Orthopaedic Trauma Association under grant #4311. This
study was further supported by NIH (R56 DE025597, R01 DE026730, R01
DE021683, R21 DE024230, R01 DE027323, HL099776, U24 DE026914, and
R21 DE019274), CIRM TR1-01249, the Oak Foundation, the Hagey Laboratory,
the Pitch Johnson Fund, and the Gunn/Olivier Research Fund to M.T.L. and NIH
(U01 HL099999, R01 CA86065, and R01 HL058770) and NIDDK SHINE Award
R01 DK115600 to I.L.W as well as NIH R01 AR079211 to J.K.L. The CIRM
training grant EDUC4-12792 (CIRM EDUC4 Research Training Program) to
E.E.W. and K.C.W. supported this work. Micro-CT work on the Bruker Skyscan
1276
was
supported
by
NIH
S10
Shared
Instrumentation
Grant
(1S10OD02349701, PI Timothy C. Doyle).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
T.H.A. and C.K.F.C. conceived the study. T.H.A. performed the majority of ex-
periments and analyzed results. T.H.A., M.T.L., D.S., and C.K.F.C. wrote the
manuscript. S.T., R.S., L.H.G., M.P.M., H.M.S., M.Y.H., Yuting Wang, E.J.H.,
F.F., K.C.W., L.S.K., D.D.L., J.S., L.Z., K.C., S.D.C., W.-J.L., M.M., N.F.N.,
N.L.V.R., E.E.W., J.K.L., A.S., Yongheng Wang, A.W., G.P.Y., S.G., J.A.B.,
M.J.G., and D.C.W. performed experiments and/or provided expertise.
T.H.A., I.L.W., M.T.L., D.S., and C.K.F.C. supervised the project.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors (T.H.A., R.S., I.L.W., M.T.L., D.S., and C.K.F.C.) have ﬁled an in-
vention disclosure (USPTO Application #63/676,773; ﬁled on July 29, 2024)
related to this work entitled: ‘‘Compositions and methods for re-activation of
dysfunctional skeletal stem cells.’’
STAR+METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include
the following:
d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
B Fetal and adult human samples
B Mice
d METHOD DETAILS
B Human fetal and adult bone processing
B Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
B Cell culture
B Fibroblast Colony-Forming-Unit (CFU-F) in vitro assay
B Osteogenic in vitro differentiation
B Chondrogenic in vitro differentiation
B Immunocytochemistry
B RNA in situ hybridization
B Subcutaneous xenograft transplant model
B Subcutaneous cell transplants
B In vivo clonal barcoding of hSSCs
B Micro-computed tomography
B Bi-cortical fracture model with hSSC transplants
B Quantitative PCR
B Spatial transcriptomics with Nanostring CosMx
B Plate-based Smart-seq2 single cell RNA-sequencing
B Single cell RNA-seq data processing
B 10X Genomics single cell RNA-sequencing
B Clonal tracking with barcoded single cell readout
B StepMiner for Boolean Analysis
B Discovery of Boolean Implication Relationships (BIRs)
B Boolean Network Explorer (BoNE)
B Boolean implication network construction
B Boolean paths
B Boolean Implication Network and BTR
B Boolean Equivalent Correlated Clusters (BECC)
B Quantiﬁcation and statistical analysis
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
stem.2025.02.013.
Received: May 9, 2024
Revised: December 17, 2024
Accepted: February 25, 2025
Published: March 20, 2025
REFERENCES
1. Weissman, I.L., and Shizuru, J.A. (2008). The origins of the identiﬁcation
and isolation of hematopoietic stem cells, and their capability to induce
donor-speciﬁc transplantation tolerance and treat autoimmune diseases.
Blood 112, 3543–3553. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2008-08-078220.
2. Beerman, I., Maloney, W.J., Weissmann, I.L., and Rossi, D.J. (2010). Stem
cells and the aging hematopoietic system. Curr. Opin. Immunol. 22,
500–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coi.2010.06.007.
3. Zhou, F., Li, X., Wang, W., Zhu, P., Zhou, J., He, W., Ding, M., Xiong, F.,
Zheng, X., Li, Z., et al. (2016). Tracing haematopoietic stem cell formation
at single-cell resolution. Nature 533, 487–492. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature17997.
4. Pellin, D., Loperﬁdo, M., Baricordi, C., Wolock, S.L., Montepeloso, A.,
Weinberg, O.K., Bifﬁ, A., Klein, A.M., and Biasco, L. (2019). A comprehensive
single cell transcriptional landscape of human hematopoietic progenitors.
Nat. Commun. 10, 2395. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10291-0.
5. Rodriguez-Fraticelli, A.E., Weinreb, C., Wang, S.-W., Migueles, R.P.,
Jankovic, M., Usart, M., Klein, A.M., Lowell, S., and Camargo, F.D.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
821

(2020). Single-cell lineage tracing unveils a role for TCF15 in haematopoi-
esis. Nature 583, 585–589. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2503-6.
6. Baryawno, N., Przybylski, D., Kowalczyk, M.S., Kfoury, Y., Severe, N.,
Gustafsson, K., Kokkaliaris, K.D., Mercier, F., Tabaka, M., Hofree, M.,
et al. (2019). A cellular taxonomy of the bone marrow stroma in homeosta-
sis and leukemia. Cell 177, 1915–1932.e16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.
2019.04.040.
7. Tikhonova, A.N., Dolgalev, I., Hu, H., Sivaraj, K.K., Hoxha, E., Cuesta-
Domı´nguez, A´ ., Pinho, S., Akhmetzyanova, I., Gao, J., Witkowski, M.,
et al. (2019). The bone marrow microenvironment at single-cell resolution.
Nature 569, 222–228. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1104-8.
8. Baccin, C., Al-Sabah, J., Velten, L., Helbling, P.M., Gr€unschl€ager, F.,
Herna´ ndez-Malmierca,
P.,
Nombela-Arrieta,
C.,
Steinmetz,
L.M.,
Trumpp, A., and Haas, S. (2020). Combined single-cell and spatial tran-
scriptomics reveal the molecular, cellular and spatial bone marrow niche
organization. Nat. Cell Biol. 22, 38–48. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-
019-0439-6.
9. Bandyopadhyay, S., Duffy, M.P., Ahn, K.J., Sussman, J.H., Pang, M.,
Smith, D., Duncan, G., Zhang, I., Huang, J., Lin, Y., et al. (2024).
Mapping the cellular biogeography of human bone marrow niches using
single-cell transcriptomics and proteomic imaging. Cell 187, 3120–
3140.e29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.04.013.
10. To, K., Fei, L., Pett, J.P., Roberts, K., Blain, R., Polanski, K., Li, T., Yayon,
N., He, P., Xu, C., et al. (2024). A multi-omic atlas of human embryonic
skeletal development. Nature 635, 657–667. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41586-024-08189-z.
11. Sacchetti, B., Funari, A., Michienzi, S., Di Cesare, S., Piersanti, S., Saggio,
I., Tagliaﬁco, E., Ferrari, S., Robey, P.G., Riminucci, M., et al. (2007). Self-
renewing osteoprogenitors in bone marrow sinusoids can organize a he-
matopoietic microenvironment. Cell 131, 324–336. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cell.2007.08.025.
12. Wang, Z., Li, X., Yang, J., Gong, Y., Zhang, H., Qiu, X., Liu, Y., Zhou, C.,
Chen, Y., Greenbaum, J., et al. (2021). Single-cell RNA sequencing decon-
volutes the in vivo heterogeneity of human bone marrow-derived mesen-
chymal stem cells. Int. J. Biol. Sci. 17, 4192–4206. https://doi.org/10.7150/
ijbs.61950.
13. Chan, C.K.F., Gulati, G.S., Sinha, R., Tompkins, J.V., Lopez, M., Carter,
A.C., Ransom, R.C., Reinisch, A., Wearda, T., Murphy, M., et al. (2018).
Identiﬁcation of the Human Skeletal Stem Cell. Cell 175, 43–56.e21.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.07.029.
14. Hoover, M.Y., Ambrosi, T.H., Steininger, H.M., Koepke, L.S., Wang, Y.,
Zhao, L., Murphy, M.P., Alam, A.A., Arouge, E.J., Butler, M.G.K., et al.
(2023). Puriﬁcation and functional characterization of novel human skeletal
stem cell lineages. Nat. Protoc. 18, 2256–2282. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41596-023-00836-5.
15. Ambrosi, T.H., Goodnough, L.H., Steininger, H.M., Hoover, M.Y., Kim, E.,
Koepke, L.S., Marecic, O., Zhao, L., Seita, J., Bishop, J.A., et al. (2020).
Geriatric fragility fractures are associated with a human skeletal stem
cell defect. Aging Cell 19, e13164. https://doi.org/10.1111/acel.13164.
16. Goodnough, L.H., Ambrosi, T.H., Steininger, H., DeBaun, M.R., Abrams,
G.D., McAdams, T.R., Gardner, M.J., Chan, C.K., and Bishop, J.A.
(2020). Delayed Union of a Diaphyseal Forearm Fracture Associated
With Impaired Osteogenic Differentiation of Prospectively
Isolated
Human Skeletal Stem Cells. JBMR Plus 4, e10398. https://doi.org/10.
1002/jbm4.10398.
17. Jaiswal, S., and Ebert, B.L. (2019). Clonal hematopoiesis in human aging
and disease. Science 366, eaan4673. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aan4673.
18. Haas, S., Trumpp, A., and Milsom, M.D. (2018). Causes and conse-
quences of hematopoietic stem cell heterogeneity. Cell Stem Cell 22,
627–638. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2018.04.003.
19. Ambrosi, T.H., Marecic, O., McArdle, A., Sinha, R., Gulati, G.S., Tong, X.,
Wang, Y., Steininger, H.M., Hoover, M.Y., Koepke, L.S., et al. (2021). Aged
skeletal stem cells generate an inﬂammatory degenerative niche. Nature
597, 256–262. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03795-7.
20. Mitchell, C.A., Verovskaya, E.V., Calero-Nieto, F.J., Olson, O.C., Swann,
J.W., Wang, X., He´ rault, A., Dellorusso, P.V., Zhang, S.Y., Svendsen,
A.F., et al. (2023). Stromal niche inﬂammation mediated by IL-1 signalling
is a targetable driver of haematopoietic ageing. Nat. Cell Biol. 25, 30–41.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41556-022-01053-0.
21. Ambrosi, T.H., Sinha, R., Steininger, H.M., Hoover, M.Y., Murphy, M.P.,
Koepke, L.S., Wang, Y., Lu, W.-J., Morri, M., Neff, N.F., et al. (2021).
Distinct skeletal stem cell types orchestrate long bone skeletogenesis.
eLife 10, e66063. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.66063.
22. Chan, C.K.F., Seo, E.Y., Chen, J.Y., Lo, D., McArdle, A., Sinha, R., Tevlin,
R., Seita, J., Vincent-Tompkins, J., Wearda, T., et al. (2015). Identiﬁcation
and speciﬁcation of the mouse skeletal stem cell. Cell 160, 285–298.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.12.002.
23. Debnath, S., Yallowitz, A.R., McCormick, J., Lalani, S., Zhang, T., Xu, R.,
Li, N., Liu, Y., Yang, Y.S., Eiseman, M., et al. (2018). Discovery of a perios-
teal stem cell mediating intramembranous bone formation. Nature 562,
133–139. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0554-8.
24. Zhou, B.O., Yue, R., Murphy, M.M., Peyer, J.G., and Morrison, S.J. (2014).
Leptin-receptor-expressing mesenchymal stromal cells represent the
main source of bone formed by adult bone marrow. Cell Stem Cell 15,
154–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2014.06.008.
25. Sivaraj, K.K., Jeong, H.-W., Dharmalingam, B., Zeuschner, D., Adams, S.,
Potente, M., and Adams, R.H. (2021). Regional specialization and fate
speciﬁcation of bone stromal cells in skeletal development. Cell Rep. 36,
109352. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109352.
26. Murphy, M.P., Koepke, L.S., Lopez, M.T., Tong, X., Ambrosi, T.H., Gulati,
G.S., Marecic, O., Wang, Y., Ransom, R.C., Hoover, M.Y., et al. (2020).
Articular cartilage regeneration by activated skeletal stem cells. Nat.
Med. 26, 1583–1592. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-1013-2.
27. Ambrosi, T.H., Scialdone, A., Graja, A., Gohlke, S., Jank, A.-M., Bocian, C.,
Woelk, L., Fan, H., Logan, D.W., Sch€urmann, A., et al. (2017). Adipocyte
Accumulation in the Bone Marrow during Obesity and Aging Impairs
Stem Cell-Based Hematopoietic and Bone Regeneration. Cell Stem Cell
20, 771–784.e6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2017.02.009.
28. He, J., Yan, J., Wang, J., Zhao, L., Xin, Q., Zeng, Y., Sun, Y., Zhang, H., Bai,
Z., Li, Z., et al. (2021). Dissecting human embryonic skeletal stem cell
ontogeny by single-cell transcriptomic and functional analyses. Cell Res.
31, 742–757. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41422-021-00467-z.
29. Kenswil, K.J.G., Pisterzi, P., Sa´ nchez-Duffhues, G., van Dijk, C., Lolli, A.,
Knuth, C., Vanchin, B., Jaramillo, A.C., Hoogenboezem, R.M., Sanders,
M.A., et al. (2021). Endothelium-derived stromal cells contribute to he-
matopoietic bone marrow niche formation. Cell Stem Cell 28, 653–
670.e11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stem.2021.01.006.
30. Sun, J., Hu, L., Bok, S., Yallowitz, A.R., Cung, M., McCormick, J., Zheng,
L.J., Debnath, S., Niu, Y., Tan, A.Y., et al. (2023). A vertebral skeletal stem
cell lineage driving metastasis. Nature 621, 602–609. https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41586-023-06519-1.
31. Bok, S., Yallowitz, A.R., Sun, J., McCormick, J., Cung, M., Hu, L., Lalani,
S., Li, Z., Sosa, B.R., Baumgartner, T., et al. (2023). A multi-stem cell basis
for craniosynostosis and calvarial mineralization. Nature 621, 804–812.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06526-2.
32. Cooper, K.L., Oh, S., Sung, Y., Dasari, R.R., Kirschner, M.W., and Tabin,
C.J. (2013). Multiple phases of chondrocyte enlargement underlie differ-
ences in skeletal proportions. Nature 495, 375–378. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nature11940.
33. Varrone, M., Tavernari, D., Santamaria-Martı´nez, A., Walsh, L.A., and
Ciriello, G. (2024). CellCharter reveals spatial cell niches associated with
tissue remodeling and cell plasticity. Nat. Genet. 56, 74–84. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41588-023-01588-4.
34. Gibon, E., Lu, L.Y., Nathan, K., and Goodman, S.B. (2017). Inﬂammation,
ageing, and bone regeneration. J. Orthop. Transl. 10, 28–35. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jot.2017.04.002.
35. Panteli, M., Pountos, I., Jones, E., and Giannoudis, P.V. (2015). Biological
and molecular proﬁle of fracture non-union tissue: current insights. J. Cell.
Mol. Med. 19, 685–713. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcmm.12532.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
822
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
36. Robey, P.G., Kuznetsov, S., Riminucci, M., and Bianco, P. (2007). The role
of stem cells in ﬁbrous dysplasia of bone and the Mccune-Albright syn-
drome. Pediatr. Endocrinol. Rev. 4, 386–394.
37. Kuznetsov, S.A., Cherman, N., Riminucci, M., Collins, M.T., Robey, P.G.,
and Bianco, P. (2008). Age-dependent demise of GNAS-mutated skeletal
stem cells and ‘‘normalization’’ of ﬁbrous dysplasia of bone. J. Bone Miner.
Res. 23, 1731–1740. https://doi.org/10.1359/jbmr.080609.
38. Dabydeen, S.A., Desai, A., and Sahoo, D. (2019). Unbiased Boolean anal-
ysis of public gene expression data for cell cycle gene identiﬁcation. Mol.
Biol. Cell 30, 1770–1779. https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E19-01-0013.
39. Dang, D., Taheri, S., Das, S., Ghosh, P., Prince, L.S., and Sahoo, D. (2020).
Computational approach to identifying universal macrophage biomarkers.
Front. Physiol. 11, 275. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2020.00275.
40. LeBleu, V.S., and Neilson, E.G. (2020). Origin and functional heterogeneity
of ﬁbroblasts. FASEB J. 34, 3519–3536. https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.
201903188R.
41. Serakinci, N., Guldberg, P., Burns, J.S., Abdallah, B., Schrødder, H.,
Jensen, T., and Kassem, M. (2004). Adult human mesenchymal stem
cell as a target for neoplastic transformation. Oncogene 23, 5095–5098.
https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1207651.
42. Macrae, V.E., Davey, M.G., McTeir, L., Narisawa, S., Yadav, M.C., Millan,
J.L., and Farquharson, C. (2010). Inhibition of PHOSPHO1 activity results
in impaired skeletal mineralization during limb development of the chick.
Bone 46, 1146–1155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2009.12.018.
43. Tevlin, R., Seo, E.Y., Marecic, O., McArdle, A., Tong, X., Zimdahl, B.,
Malkovskiy, A., Sinha, R., Gulati, G., Li, X., et al. (2017). Pharmacological
rescue of diabetic skeletal stem cell niches. Sci. Transl. Med. 9,
eaag2809. https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aag2809.
44. Baud’huin, M., Solban, N., Cornwall-Brady, M., Sako, D., Kawamoto, Y.,
Liharska, K., Lath, D., Bouxsein, M.L., Underwood, K.W., Ucran, J.,
et al. (2012). A soluble bone morphogenetic protein type IA receptor in-
creases bone mass and bone strength. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109,
12207–12212. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1204929109.
45. Meng, X.-M., Nikolic-Paterson, D.J., and Lan, H.Y. (2016). TGF-b: the
master regulator of ﬁbrosis. Nat. Rev. Nephrol. 12, 325–338. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nrneph.2016.48.
46. Lim, C.Y., Wang, H., Woodhouse, S., Piterman, N., Wernisch, L., Fisher, J.,
and Go¨ ttgens, B. (2016). BTR: training asynchronous Boolean models us-
ing single-cell expression data. BMC Bioinformatics 17, 355. https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12859-016-1235-y.
47. Selman, M., and Pardo, A. (2021). Fibroageing: an ageing pathological
feature driven by dysregulated extracellular matrix-cell mechanobiology.
Ageing Res. Rev. 70, 101393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2021.101393.
48. Jiang, H., Lei, R., Ding, S.-W., and Zhu, S. (2014). Skewer: a fast and ac-
curate adapter trimmer for next-generation sequencing paired-end reads.
BMC Bioinformatics 15, 182. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-15-182.
49. Dobin, A., Davis, C.A., Schlesinger, F., Drenkow, J., Zaleski, C., Jha, S.,
Batut, P., Chaisson, M., and Gingeras, T.R. (2013). STAR: ultrafast univer-
sal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15–21. https://doi.org/10.1093/
bioinformatics/bts635.
50. Li, B., and Dewey, C.N. (2011). RSEM: accurate transcript quantiﬁcation
from
RNA-Seq
data
with or
without
a
reference
genome.
BMC
Bioinformatics 12, 323. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-12-323.
51. Nestorowa, S., Hamey, F.K., Pijuan Sala, B., Diamanti, E., Shepherd, M.,
Laurenti, E., Wilson, N.K., Kent, D.G., and Go¨ ttgens, B. (2016). A single-
cell resolution map of mouse hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell dif-
ferentiation. Blood 128, e20–e31. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2016-05-
716480.
52. Gulati, G.S., Sikandar, S.S., Wesche, D.J., Manjunath, A., Bharadwaj, A.,
Berger, M.J., Ilagan, F., Kuo, A.H., Hsieh, R.W., Cai, S., et al. (2020).
Single-cell transcriptional diversity is a hallmark of developmental poten-
tial. Science 367, 405–411. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aax0249.
53. La Manno, G., Soldatov, R., Zeisel, A., Braun, E., Hochgerner, H.,
Petukhov, V., Lidschreiber, K., Kastriti, M.E., Lo¨ nnerberg, P., Furlan, A.,
et al. (2018). RNA velocity of single cells. Nature 560, 494–498. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0414-6.
54. Chen, E.Y., Tan, C.M., Kou, Y., Duan, Q., Wang, Z., Meirelles, G.V., Clark,
N.R., and Ma’ayan, A. (2013). Enrichr: interactive and collaborative HTML5
gene list enrichment analysis tool. BMC Bioinformatics 14, 128. https://
doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-14-128.
55. Sahoo, D., Dill, D.L., Tibshirani, R., and Plevritis, S.K. (2007). Extracting bi-
nary signals from microarray time-course data. Nucleic Acids Res. 35,
3705–3712. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkm284.
56. Sahoo, D., Dill, D.L., Gentles, A.J., Tibshirani, R., and Plevritis, S.K. (2008).
Boolean implication networks derived from large scale, whole genome mi-
croarray datasets. Genome Biol. 9, R157. https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-
2008-9-10-r157.
57. Sahoo, D., Seita, J., Bhattacharya, D., Inlay, M.A., Weissman, I.L.,
Plevritis, S.K., and Dill, D.L. (2010). MiDReG: a method of mining develop-
mentally regulated genes using Boolean implications. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 107, 5732–5737. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0913635107.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823, May 1, 2025
823

STAR+METHODS
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Mouse anti-human CD45
BioLegend
Cat#304029-BL; RRID: AB_2174123
Mouse anti-human CD235a
BioLegend
Cat#306612-BL; RRID: AB_2116241
Mouse anti-human CD31
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#13-0319-82; RRID: AB_466423
Mouse anti-human CD202b (TIE-2)
BioLegend
Cat#334204; RRID: AB_1186046
Mouse anti-human CD146
BioLegend
Cat#342010; RRID: AB_10644009
Mouse anti-human PDPN
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#17-9381-42; RRID: AB_10801951
Mouse anti-human CD164
BioLegend
Cat#324808; RRID: AB_2072587
Mouse anti-human CD73
BioLegend
Cat#344016; RRID: AB_2561809
Streptavidin (APC-Alexa Fluor 750)
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#SA1027; RRID: AB_2716627
Anti-alpha smooth muscle Actin
Abcam
Cat# ab7817; RRID: AB_262054
Goat anti-mouse AF594
Abcam
Cat# ab150120; RRID: AB_2631447
Mouse anti-human PDPN
eBioscience
Cat#BMS1105; RRID: AB_10598795
Goat anti-mouse AF488
Abcam
Cat# ab150113; RRID: AB_2687506
Mouse anti-Human Nuclear Antigen (HNA) antibody
Abcam
CAT#ab191181; RRID: AB_2885016
Rabbit anti-human Osteocalcin
Abcam
CAT#ab93876; RRID: AB_10675660
Rabbit anti-human Collagen II
Abcam
CAT#ab34712; RRID: AB_731688
RNAscope Probe- Hs-HIC1
Advanced Cell Diagnostics
Cat#470571
RNAscope Probe- Hs-SKIL-C3
Advanced Cell Diagnostics
Cat#427981-C3
RNAscope Probe- Hs-SPP1-C2
Advanced Cell Diagnostics
Cat#420101-C2
RNAscope Probe- Hs-FMO1-C2
Advanced Cell Diagnostics
Cat#892031-C2
TaqMan Gene Expression Probe GAPDH
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Hs02786624_g1
TaqMan Gene Expression Probe SPP1
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Hs00959010_m1
TaqMan Gene Expression Probe FBN1
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Hs00171191_m1
TaqMan Gene Expression Probe HAPLN1
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Hs01091999_m1
TaqMan Gene Expression Probe FMO1
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Hs01032912_m1
TaqMan Gene Expression Probe BMPR1A
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Hs04980288_g1
TaqMan Gene Expression Probe IHH
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Hs00745531_s1
TaqMan Gene Expression Probe SOX9
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Hs00165814_m1
TaqMan Gene Expression Probe TAGLN
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Hs01038777_g1
Biological samples
Human fetal samples
certiﬁed procurement services
Gestational age and sex listed in Table S1
Adult samples
Stanford University and UC Davis
Health Hospitals
Age and sex listed in Table S1.
Chemicals, peptides, and recombinant proteins
Type II collagenase
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#C6885
DNase I
Worthington
Cat#NC9199796
PBS
GIBCO
Cat#C14190500BT
UltraPure 0.5M EDTA
Invitrogen
Cat#15575020
DAPI and Hoechst Nucleic Acid Stains
Invitrogen
Cat#D1306
MEM-alpha medium
Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#12561-056
Human platelet-derived lysate
Stem Cell Technologies
Cat#06960
Penicillin-Streptomycin solution
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#15140-122
Crystal Violet
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#B21932.22
Paraformaldehyde
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#047340.9L
(Continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
e1
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823.e1–e11, May 1, 2025
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Dexamethasone
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#A17590.03
Sodium b-glycerophosphate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#G9891
L-Ascorbic acid 2-phosphate
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A8960
Alizarin Red S
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A5533
DMH1
Selleck
Cat#S7146
SAG 21k
Biotechne
Cat#5282
Acetic Acid
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#A35-500
Methanol
Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#A412-4
Alcian Blue
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A5268
Human Transforming growth factor b1
Peprotech
Cat#100-21C
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)
Invitrogen
Cat#15573-038
Bovine Serum Albumin
Sigma-Aldrich
Cat#A2153
Triton X-100
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#A16046.AP
Matrigel
Corning
Cat#354230
Anorganic cancellous bone graft granulate
InterOss
Cat#IOSG050
Opti-MEM I Reduced Serum Medium
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#31985070
Sucrose
Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#S5-500
TRIzol
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#15596026
Nuclease-free water
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Cat#10977023
RNase inhibitor
Clontech
Cat#2313B
dNTP
Invitrogen
Cat#10297-018
MVG sodium alginate
Pronova Novamatrix
Cat#4200101
Sodium periodate
Acros Organics
CAS#7790-28-5
CaCl2
MilliporeSigma
CAS#10043-52-4
Ammonium chloride
Sigma
Cat#A9434-500G
Potassium bicarbonate
Fisher Chemical
Cat#P235-500
Critical commercial assays
RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent Reagent
Kit v2
Advanced Cell Diagnostics
Cat#323100
Taq PCR Master Mix Kit
Qiagen
Cat#201445
QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit
Qiagen
Cat#205313
CosMx Human Universal Cell Characterization
Panel (RNA, 1000 Plex)
Nanostring
CMX-H-USCP-1KP-R
ERCC (External RNA Controls Consortium)
ExFold RNA Spike-In Mix 2
Invitrogen
Cat#4456739
SMARTScribe reverse transcriptase
Clontech
Cat#639538
KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix
Kapa Biosystems
Cat#KK2602
AMPure XP beads
Beckman Coulter
Cat#A63882
Nextera XT kit
Illumina
Cat#FC-131-1096
Fragment Analyzer DNA/NGS Kits
Agilent
DNF-474-0500
Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA kit
Agilent
5067-4626
10X Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3ʹ v3.1
GEM kit
10X Genomics Inc
PN-1000121
Deposited data
Single-cell RNA sequencing data
This paper
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO)
repository, GEO: GSE234040
Clonetracker
Github
https://github.com/sahoo00/Clonetracker
(https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14823191, v1.0.1)
Invariant-Circuits
Github
https://github.com/sahoo00/Invariant-Circuits
(https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14823193, v1.0.1))
(Continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823.e1–e11, May 1, 2025
e2

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
Fetal and adult human samples
The gestational age and sex of fetal specimens are listed in Table S1. Six human fetal samples were obtained from certiﬁed procure-
ment services and shipped overnight. Samples ranged in age from 17 to 20 weeks of gestation with no restrictions on race or gender.
Adult hSSCs for functional and scRNAseq assays were obtained from fracture callus (day 1-8 after injury), nonunions (120-300 days
after injury), uninjured periosteum, and Fibrous Dysplasia bone tissues. Age and sex of bone specimens are also listed in Table S1.
Fracture callus/nonunion/periosteal/Fibrous Dysplasia specimens were obtained from Stanford University and UC Davis Hospitals.
Fetal sample procurement and handling as well as collection of all other tissues, including fracture callus, nonunion and Fibrous
Continued
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Experimental models: Organisms/strains
NSG (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ;) mice
JAX
JAX: 005557
Oligonucleotides
oligo dT30VN
IDT
custom: 50-AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGA
GTACT30VN-30
Template-switching oligonucleotide (TSO)
Exiqon
custom: 50-AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGA
GTACATrGrG+G-30
IS PCR primers
IDT
custom: 50-AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAG
AGT-30
Partial Read 1 primer (CloneTracker assay)
IDT
50-CTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT-30
Adaptor-FBP1 (CloneTracker assay)
IDT
50-GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTT
CCGATCTCCGACCACCGAACGCAACGCA
CGCA-30
Recombinant DNA
CloneTracker XP 10M Barcode-3’ Library in
pScribe5-Venus-Puro plasmid
Cellecta
Cat#BCXP10M3VP-P
Software and algorithms
Scanpy
Github
v1.9, https://github.com/scverse/scanpy
Squidpy
Github
v1.2.1, https://github.com/scverse/squidpy
CellphoneDB
Github
v5, https://github.com/Teichlab/cellphonedb
CellCharter
Github
v0.3.0, https://github.com/CSOgroup/
cellcharter
bcl2fastq2
Github
v2.18, https://github.com/brwnj/bcl2fastq
Skewer
Github
v0.2.2, https://github.com/relipmoc/skewer
STAR aligner
Github
v2.6.1d, https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR
RSEM
Github
v1.2.21, https://github.com/deweylab/RSEM
Cellranger
10X Genomics Inc
v7.1.0
dnaclust
Github
https://github.com/hsmurali/SCRAPT/tree/
main/dnaclust
Scvelo
Github
v0.2.5, https://github.com/theislab/scvelo
StepMiner
Github
https://github.com/suryattheja/StepMiner-
BioInformatics
BooleanNet
Github
https://github.com/sahoo00/BooleanNet
MiDReG
UCSD
http://hegemon.ucsd.edu/microarray/
MiDReG/
Boolean Equivalent Correlated Clusters
UCSD
http://hegemon.ucsd.edu/Misc/biomarkers/
bone.php?go=hs
GraphPad Prism
GraphPad Software
v.9.5.1, http://www.graphpad.com/
scientiﬁc-software/prism
FlowJo
FLOWJO LLC
https://www.ﬂowjo.com/
Cytotrace
Stanford University
https://cytotrace.stanford.edu/
Enrichr
Github
https://github.com/wjawaid/enrichR
Biorender
Biorender
https://www.biorender.com/
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
e3
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823.e1–e11, May 1, 2025
Dysplasia, used in this study were conducted under IRB-35711 (Stanford) and IRB-1997852 (UC Davis) in accordance with the guide-
lines and regulations set by the Institutional Review Board of Stanford University School of Medicine and UC Davis School of Med-
icine, respectively. On these IRBs, informed consent was not required as samples were considered biological waste. Brieﬂy, fracture
callus tissue was collected from patients undergoing an open approach and direct reduction of fracture fragments. Hematoma and
fracture callus tissue that disturbed satisfactory alignment of displaced fragments was removed and saved for research purposes at
time of surgery. Only tissue between the two ends of the fracture was removed to reassemble fragments prior to ﬁxation. Intrame-
dullary sampling was not included in this study. No restrictions were made regarding the race, gender, or age of the specimen’s
donor. Following excision, all specimens were placed on ice, and hSSCs were isolated as described below.
Mice
Three-month old male immunodeﬁcient NSG mice (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ; JAX: 005557) were used for transplantation
studies. Mice were maintained at the Stanford University and UC Davis research animal facilities in accordance with university guide-
lines. Animals were given food and water ad libitum and housed in temperature- and light-controlled micro-insulators. All studies
were approved via IACUC by the respective institutions.
METHOD DETAILS
Human fetal and adult bone processing
Human specimens were processed for the generation of a single cell solution as previously described.14 Brieﬂy, human fetal bones
were separated and gently denuded of soft tissue using scissors and paper towels. Intact long bones, spine, pelvis and cranial tissues
were collected. Long bones were additionally dissected by ﬁrst gently stripping periosteal/perichondral tissue from the intact skeletal
element using a razor blade and ﬁne forceps. The cartilaginous bone ends were then removed to analyze the growth plate region. For
spine tissue vertebral bodies from cerebral, thoracic and lumbar vertebrae were combined. Disc tissues were then separated from
the rest of the vertebral body by applying force from both sides of the tissue using forceps at the intersection of disc and bone areas.
For cranial tissue dissection, sutures were ﬁrst removed using a razor blade and ﬁne scissors. Frontal and parietal skull elements were
then separated along the areas were sutures were removed. For tendon tissue, achillea and patella tendon ﬁbers were combined.
Once all the desired skeletal site tissues were dissected and cleaned, they were placed on ice in individual 10 cm Petri dishes con-
taining FACS buffer. From adult human bone specimens regions containing distinguishable areas of clotted blood were dissected out
with scalpels and the remaining tissue was then minced with razor blades, resuspended in 3000 U/mL type II collagenase (Sigma-
Aldrich, Cat#C6885) digestion buffer supplemented with 100 U/mL DNase I (Worthington, Cat#NC9199796) and incubated at 37C
for 60 min under constant agitation. The supernatant was ﬁltered through a 70 mm nylon mesh and quenched with staining buffer (2%
fetal bovine serum (FBS), in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), GIBCO, Cat#C14190500BT). Cells were centrifuged at 200 g at 4C
followed by resuspension in the staining buffer.
Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
After removing supernatant from the derived pellet, human stromal cells were separated from red blood cells (RBCs) by addition of
ACK 2 mL of ACK (Ammonium-Chloride-Potassium) lysis buffer. After three minutes incubation on ice 13 mL of staining buffer was
added to quench lysis reaction followed by centrifugation at 200 g at 4C. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 100 mL of staining
buffer and stained with ﬂuorochrome-conjugated antibodies against CD45 (BioLegend, Cat#304029-BL), CD235a (BioLegend,
Cat#306612-BL),
CD31
(Thermo
Fisher
Scientiﬁc,
Cat#13-0319-82),
CD202b
(TIE-2)
(BioLegend,
Cat#334204),
CD146
(BioLegend, Cat#342010), PDPN (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Cat#17-9381-42), CD164 (BioLegend, Cat#324808), and CD73
(BioLegend, Cat#344016). Secondary antibody staining against Biotin was performed after an extra wash step using Streptavidin
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Cat#SA1027). A FACS Aria II (BD Biosciences) or Aurora CS (CYTEK) was used for ﬂow cytometric analysis
and sorting of hSSCs. Gating was established with IgG controls and the help of ﬂuorescence-minus-one (FMO: staining with all ﬂuo-
rophores except one) controls and negative DAPI staining was used as a measure for cell viability.
Cell culture
Freshly sorted hSSCs were collected in 200 mL of staining buffer. For assays investigating downstream cell populations, human
Bone-Cartilage-Stromal Progenitors (hBCSPs) and osteoprogenitors (hOPs) were sorted into individual collection tubes as well. Cells
were pelleted and resuspended in expansion media containing MEM-alpha medium (Fisher Scientiﬁc: Cat#12561-056) with 10%
human platelet-derived lysate (Stem Cell Technologies, Cat#06960), 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin solution (Pen-Strep; Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, Cat#15140-122). Plated culture vessels were maintained in an incubator at 37C with 5% CO2. Fracture callus sample
specimens yielding less than 30 hSSCs were excluded from further functional assays.
Fibroblast Colony-Forming-Unit (CFU-F) in vitro assay
For fetal CFU-F in vitro assays, 500 hSSCs were sorted and plated into 6-well plates and cultured for 10-14 days. At this time, spec-
imens were ﬁxed with 2% PFA and stained with 0.5% Crystal Violet solution. The number of colonies (>30 cells) per well was counted
to assess percentage of CFU-F. Human fracture callus derived hSSCs were sorted and plated at maximum of 500 cells per culture
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823.e1–e11, May 1, 2025
e4

vessel into 10 cm culture dishes. Colonies were counted two weeks after seeding using a light microscopy. Cells were then lifted and
used for in vitro differentiation assays. Samples yielding less than three colonies were excluded from in vitro differentiation assays.
Osteogenic in vitro differentiation
Freshly sorted cells expanded for 10-14 days were lifted by trypsin digestion and seeded into 96-well plates for osteogenic differen-
tiation. After overnight incubation expansion media was substituted with osteogenic differentiation media (DMEM medium with 10%
FBS, 1% Pen-Strep, 100 nM dexamethasone, 10 mM sodium b-glycerophosphate [Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#G9891], 2.5 mM ascorbic
acid 2-phosphate [Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#A8960]). Media was changed every other day for 14 days. Cells then were ﬁxed with 2%
PFA and stained with 2% Alizarin Red S (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#A5533) to assess osteogenic potential. For experiments testing the acti-
vation of speciﬁc pathways on osteogenic differentiation DMH1 (4 mM; Selleck: Cat#4126) and/or SAG 21k (0.05 mM; CAS#946002-
48-8, provided by the Beachy lab at Stanford University) were added during each osteogenic media change. Plates were washed and
dried before subsequently dissolving stain in 300 ml of 20% Methanol / 10% Acetic Acid solution. After the complete liberation of
staining, 80 ml of each well was transferred into a new 96-well plate in duplicates and absorbance was measured at 450 nm using
a Ultraspec 2100 UV/Visible Spectrophotometer (Biochrom, Harvard Bioscience).
Chondrogenic in vitro differentiation
For chondrogenic differentiation cells were cultured in a micromass. For that, a 5 mL drop containing 8x105 cells was placed into the
center of a 24-well plate well. Cells were incubated at 37C for two hours with 5% CO2 and then provided with 500 mL of pre-warmed
chondrogenic media (DMEMhigh with 10 % FBS, 100 nM Dexamethasone, 1 mM L-ascorbic acid-2-phosphate and 10 ng/ml Human
Transforming growth factor b1 [Peprotech: Cat#100-21C]). Media was refreshed every other day for two weeks. The micromass was
then ﬁxed with 2% PFA and stained with 1% Alcian Blue (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#A5268). Chondrogenic potential was assessed by
spectrophotometrically measuring absorption at 595 nm.
Immunocytochemistry
Freshly sorted hSSCs were plated at a density of 1,000 cells per 96-well plate well and maintained in expansion media for two days,
allowing to attach and expand. At day two culture medium was removed and cells were ﬁxed with 2% PFA. Fixed cell cultures were
then permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 solution and blocked with 3% BSA in PBS. Antibody staining was conducted with primary
human Anti-alpha smooth muscle Actin antibody (Abcam, Cat# ab7817) and secondary goat anti-mouse AF594 (Abcam, Cat#
ab150120). For nuclear staining specimens were treated with DAPI.
RNA in situ hybridization
Fresh human fetal long bone specimens (17 weeks) were ﬁxed overnight before decalciﬁcation using 400 mM Ethylenediaminetetra-
acetic acid (EDTA; Invitrogen, Cat#15573-038) in PBS (pH 7.2) at 4C for 2 weeks. Specimens were then cryopreserved and
sectioned at 10 microns. Sections were then processed for RNA in situ hybridization using RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent Re-
agent Kit v2 according to manufacturer’s protocol (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Cat#323100). Sections were RNA-probed with HIC1
(ACD, Cat# 470571), SKIL (ACD, Cat# 427981-C3), SPP1 (ACD, Cat# 420101-C2) and FMO1 (ACD, Cat# 892031-C2). Additional
immunoﬂuorescence was added by staining with mouse anti-human PDPN antibody (eBioscience, Cat#BMS1105) followed by sec-
ondary goat anti-mouse AF488 (Abcam, Cat# ab150113) as well as counterstaining with DAPI.
Subcutaneous xenograft transplant model
Freshly dissected fetal phalanges (gestational age 17-20 weeks) were transplanted into the the dorsum of 3-month-old immunode-
ﬁcient NSG mice (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ; JAX: 005557) as described previously.14 Brieﬂy, a small skin incision was
made in the dorsum of anesthetized NSG mice and fetal phalanges slid under the skin. Interrupted sutures were applied to close
the incision, and transplants were allowed to engraft and grow for indicated time points.
Subcutaneous cell transplants
Freshly sorted patient-derived hSSCs were sorted and expanded to conﬂuency. 1x106 cells were mixed with 5 mL of Matrigel (Corn-
ing; Cat#354230) and seeded on 20 mg anorganic cancellous bone graft granulat (InterOss, 0.25-1mm, Cat#IOSG050) before in-
cubation at 37C for 1h. For experiments testing the activation of speciﬁc pathways DMH1 (2 mg/mL; Selleck: Cat#4126) and SAG 21k
(30 ng/mL; CAS#946002-48-8, provided by the Beachy lab at Stanford University) or PBS as control were added during the Matrigel/
InterOss/Cell mixture process. Cell mixtures were placed at room and then immediately subcutaneously transplanted into the
dorsum of 3-month old immunodeﬁcient NSG mice (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ; JAX: 005557). Grafts were harvested at
indicated timepoints and analyzed by microCT and histology.
In vivo clonal barcoding of hSSCs
For clonal tracking of single hSSCs, 1.5-2x105 freshly sorted cells were seeded into 12-well plate with 1 mL of Opti-MEM Reduced
Serum Media containing lentiviral barcode particles generated from CloneTracker XP 10M Barcode-3’ Library in pScribe5-Venus-
Puro plasmid (Cellecta, Cat#BCXP10M3VP-P). Cells were spun in the well plate at 1,500g for 60 min at 24–27 C. Directly following
that step, 3 mL of fresh culture media was added, and cells were incubated at 37 C for 24 h. At this point, the media was changed,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
e5
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823.e1–e11, May 1, 2025
and cells allowed to further incubate for three days. Cells were then lifted using collagenase and stained with FACS antibodies. Sorted
cells with phenotypic hSSC surface marker proﬁle and simultaneous expression of Venus ﬂuorophore were used for renal capsule
transplantation assays into NSG mice. To prevent dilution of clones in ﬁnal readout, 500 Venus+, barcoded hSSCs were mixed
with 5,000 Venus, non-barcoded hSSC supporter cells, mixed with 5 mL of Matrigel and transplanted below the renal capsule of
mice. Three transplants per hSSC source were conducted. Each mouse was transplanted with hSSCs from the growth plate under
the renal capsule of one kidney and with hSSCs from the periosteum contralaterally. After three weeks, kidneys were excised from
sacriﬁced mice and assessed for Venus expression in the graft tissue via microscope. Grafts were then dissected out, pooled by
respective hSSC sources and processed for ﬂow cytometric isolation of Venus+ cells as described above. Sorted cells from grafts
were processed for 10X genomics single cell RNA-sequencing for interrogation into cell fates and clonal relationships
(described below).
Micro-computed tomography
Grafts were dissected from mice and ﬁxed in 2% PFA overnight. Samples were then scanned using a Bruker Skyscan 1276 (Bruker
Preclinical Imaging) with a source voltage of 85 kV, a source current of 200 mA, a ﬁlter setting of AI 1 mm, and pixel size of 12 microns
at 2016 x 1344. Reconstructed samples were analyzed using CT Analyser and CTvox software (Bruker).
Bi-cortical fracture model with hSSC transplants
FACS-puriﬁed primary hSSCs were processed from adult human donors and cultured in hSSC media until conﬂuent. Cells were then
trypsinized and loaded onto alginate scaffolds. Speciﬁcally, MVG sodium alginate was partially oxidized to a theoretical extent of 1%
with sodium periodate, which created acetal groups susceptible to hydrolysis and then modiﬁed with arginine–glycine–aspartic acid
peptide (RGD) to promote cell adhesion. First, Alginate was resuspended in sterile PBS (pH 7.25) at 2%(w/v) and optionally mixed
with SAG 21k (Biotechne, CAT#5282, resuspended in DMSO at 40 mM) and/or DMH1 (Selleckchem, CAT#S7146, resuspended
in DMSO at 40 mM) and mixed overnight at 4C. Cells were resuspended at 5 x 106/mL in the precursor solution and pipetted
onto a silicone mold. To crosslink, samples were submerged in 20 mL of 100 mM CaCl2 for 20 minutes before transferring to a
well plate. Each gel had a total volume of 6 mL with ﬁnal cell number of 3 x 104 cells and optionally with 0.05 mM SAG 21k and/or
4 mM DMH1. Secondly, adult male NSG mice were anaesthetized using aerosolized isoﬂurane and analgesia was administered
before incision. The femur was exposed after muscle distraction and lateral dislocation of the patella. A 25-gauge regular bevel nee-
dle (BD BioSciences) was inserted between the femoral condyles to provide relative intramedullary ﬁxation, and a transverse fracture
was created in the mid-diaphysis using micro-scissors. The gel detailed above was then placed adjacent to the fracture. Right after,
the patella was relocated, and 6-0 nylon suture (Ethicon) was used to re-approximate the muscles. For ﬂow cytometric analysis, mice
were sacriﬁced after 10 days, and femurs were processed for analysis. For mCT and histology, mice were sacriﬁced after 14 days.
Femurs were ﬁxed in 2% paraformaldehyde overnight, decalciﬁed in 10% EDTA, and dehydrated in 30% sucrose. Pentachrome and
IHC staining were performed with anti-Human Nuclear Antigen (HNA) antibody (Abcam, CAT#ab191181), Anti-Osteocalcin antibody
(Abcam, CAT#ab93876) and Anti-Collagen II antibody (Abcam, CAT#ab34712).
Quantitative PCR
For analysis of freshly isolated, non-cultured cell populations of interest, fetal cells were directly sorted into 1.5 mL Eppendorf tubes
containing 500 uL of Trizol. RNA was isolated from 5-10x104 cells and generated cDNA was used for TaqMan Real-Time PCR Assays
(ThermoFisher) with the following probes: GAPDH: Hs02786624_g1; SPP1: Hs00959010_m1; FBN1: Hs00171191_m1; HAPLN1:
Hs01091999_m1; FMO1: Hs01032912_m1. For analysis of in vitro factor treated hSSCs, primary cells were cultured in hSSC expan-
sion media until conﬂuent. Cells were then trypsinized and plated in a 12-well plate at 100,000 cells/well. Osteogenic media was
added the day after plating, with or without the addition of the small molecules SAG21k (Hh activator) and DMH1 (BMP receptor in-
hibitor). After 3 days, cells were ﬁxed with TRIzol Reagent and processed for mRNA extraction. QuantiTect Reverse Transcription
Kit was used to create the cDNA library, followed by the QuantiTect Taq PCR Master Mix Kit for qPCR. The following probes
were used: GAPDH: Hs02786624_g1; BMPR1A: Hs04980288_g1; IHH: Hs00745531_s1; SOX9: Hs00165814_m1; TAGLN:
Hs01038777_g1.
Spatial transcriptomics with Nanostring CosMx
CosMx technology (Nanostring, Seattle, WA, USA), a high-plex spatial molecular imager, was employed to proﬁle a 20-week human
embryonic phalange specimen with the 1,000 genes CosMx Universal Cell Characterization Panel following the manufacturer’s pro-
tocol. Brieﬂy, ﬁxed frozen specimens were prepared and sliced to a thickness of 5 mm. PanCK, CD45, and CD68 antibodies and DAPI
were used as morphological markers. Prepared samples were loaded onto the CosMx SMI instrument and underwent data collec-
tion, image processing, feature extraction, and cell segmentation. Transcriptomic proﬁles of individual cells were generated by inte-
grating target transcript locations with cell segmentation information. These proﬁles were subsequently used for downstream data
analysis. Spatial transcriptome analysis was performed using squidpy (v1.2.1) and scanpy (v1.9.3). Cells with <20 probe counts were
ﬁltered out. After quality control, 58,377 cells were obtained within the CosMx SP5 dataset of 104 ﬁelds of view (FOVs). To integrate
cellular molecular features with tissue spatial histology, we employed CellCharter33 as the algorithmic framework to identify, char-
acterize and compare celluar niches. Five distinct celluar niches were annotated. Differentially expressed genes were obtained using
the ‘‘rank_genes_groups’’ function in scanpy. An average of 113 genes per cell were detected for the periosteal region analyzed, 75
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823.e1–e11, May 1, 2025
e6

genes per cell for the growth plate region and 66 genes per cell for the whole phalange. CellphoneDB was used to investigate inter-
actions between putative hSSCs and surrounding cells using only genes that were expressed in at least 5% of the cells within the
respective areas analyzed. Cells located more than 200 mm away were excluded from analysis.
Plate-based Smart-seq2 single cell RNA-sequencing
Single cell suspension derived from target tissues was processed for ﬂow cytometric isolation as described above and published.14
Single cell RNA-sequencing was conducted as reported before.19 Brieﬂy, single cells were index-sorted into 96-well plates contain-
ing 4 mL lysis buffer [1 U/mL RNase inhibitor (Clontech, Cat#2313B), 0.1% Triton (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Cat#85111), 2.5 mM dNTP
(Invitrogen, Cat#10297-018), 2.5 mM oligo dT30VN (IDT, custom: 50–AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTACT30VN-30), and 1:600,000
ERCC (External RNA Controls Consortium) ExFold RNA Spike-In Mix 2 (ERCC; Invitrogen, Cat#4456739) in nuclease-free water
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Cat#10977023)]. Immediately after sorting, plates were centrifuged at 3000 x g for 30 seconds at 4 C,
snap frozen on dry ice and kept at -80 C until cDNA synthesis. Reverse transcription (RT) and cDNA pre-ampliﬁcation was performed
using the Smart-seq2 protocol with minor modiﬁcations. Lysis plates were thawed on ice and incubated at 72 C for 3 minutes fol-
lowed by immediate snap chilling on ice to anneal the oligo dT30VN primer. cDNA synthesis from single cell RNA was performed
using oligo-dT primed reverse transcription with SMARTScribe reverse transcriptase (Clontech, Cat#639538) and a locked-nucleic
acid containing template-switching oligonucleotide (TSO; Exiqon, custom: 50-AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTACATrGrG+G-30).
PCR ampliﬁcation was conducted using KAPA HiFi HotStart ReadyMix (Kapa Biosystems, Cat#KK2602) with IS PCR primers (IDT,
custom: 50-AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGT-30). To remove residual reaction components and oligos smaller than 400 base pairs,
pre-ampliﬁed cDNA was puriﬁed using 0.65–0.75X volume of calibrated AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter, Cat#A63882). The
cDNA concentration and size distribution for each well was assessed by a high-sensitivity AATI 96-capillary fragment analyzer
(HS NGS Fragment Kit [1-6000bp]; Agilent). cDNA from each well was normalized to the desired concentration range (0.15 ng/
mL) by dilution with EB buffer. The content of four 96-well plates was then consolidated into 384-well plates without cherry-pick-
ing/removing wells not holding any single cell cDNA. Subsequently the 384-well plates were used for library preparation (Nextera
XT kit; Illumina, Cat#FC-131-1096) using a semi-automated pipeline. The barcoded libraries of each well were pooled, cleaned-
up, and size-selected using two rounds (0.35x and 0.75x) of Agencourt AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter), as recommended
by the Nextera XT protocol (Illumina). A high-sensitivity AATI fragment analyzer run was used to assess fragment distribution and
concentrations. Pooled libraries were sequenced on a NovaSeq 6000 S4 ﬂow cell (Illumina) to obtain 1–2 million 2 x 150 base-
pair paired-end reads per cell.
Single cell RNA-seq data processing
Data was demultiplexed using bcl2fastq2 2.18 (Illumina). Raw reads were further processed using skewer v0.2.2. for 30 quality-trim-
ming, 30 adaptor-trimming, and removal of degenerate reads.48 Trimmed reads were then aligned to the hg38 genome (Gencode
version GRCh38.p13) with STAR aligner version 2.6.1d using 2-pass mapping,49 and gene counts were calculated using RSEM
1.2.21.50 When aligning female data the entire Y chromosome was masked, while only the PAR regions on the Y chromosome
were masked for male data. If sex was unknown PAR-masking was used. For data pre-processing gene count tables were combined
with metadata using the Scanpy python package v1.9.1. For each dataset investigated, cells with less than 500 genes or 25,000 read
counts as well as mitochondrial gene content higher than 15%, ERCC content higher than 30%, and ribosomal gene content higher
than 25% were excluded. Scrublet was then used to detect and remove residual duplicates. The data were normalized using size
factor normalization so that every cell had 10,000 read counts, were log2 transformed, underwent cell cycle regression,51 and
were scaled to a maximum value of 10. To account for batch effects and proper data integration, Scanpy-integrated ComBat was
applied for cells derived from separate sequencing runs followed by data scaling. Highly variable genes were computed using default
parameters. We then performed principal component analysis with elbow plot visualization, computed the neighborhood graph, and
clustered the data using the Leiden method. Cytotrace (https://cytotrace.stanford.edu/) was used to explore the developmental po-
tential of single cells analyzed.52 To plot and infer cellular state trajectories Force-directed graph drawing (ForceAtlas2) with PAGA
(Partition-based graph abstraction) or RNA Velocity was applied to the single-cell RNA-seq data.53 Enrichr was used to identify path-
ways based on top upregulated genes in the target populations.54 A total of 5,764 high quality cells across all donors listed in Table S1
were included in the analysis with an average gene count of 3,262 for fetal and 2,225 for patient hSSCs across datasets. Step-by-step
instructions to reproduce preprocessing and analysis of data are available for deposited data in the Gene Expression Omnibus data-
base (see Resource Availability statement).
10X Genomics single cell RNA-sequencing
Freshly collected fracture nonunion tissue was harvested and processed as described for tissue dissociation protocol above. The
single cell solution was stained for ﬂow cytometry and 3x106 PI-CD45-CD235a- cells were sorted into a collection tube containing
FACS buffer. Cells were then processed with 10X Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3ʹ GEM kit (10X Genomics Inc, v3.1) according
to manufacturer’s instruction to target 10,000 cells. Barcoded samples were demultiplexed, aligned to the human genome
(GRCh38.p13), and UMI-collapsed with the Cellranger toolkit with standard settings and –force-cells=10,000 (version 7.1.0, 10X Ge-
nomics Inc) sequenced on an partial-lane Illumina NovaSeq platform. We used the Scanpy package (version 1.9.1.) to explore the
data. First, quality ﬁltering to exclude multiplets and cells of poor quality was conducted by only keeping cells with a gene count
of >500 and < 4000 with less than 20% mitochondrial and 35% ribosomal gene content as well as running Scrublet leaving 9,301
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
e7
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823.e1–e11, May 1, 2025
high quality cells with an average gene count of 2,225 per cell. Genes expressed in less than 3 cells across all cells were also removed
from downstream analysis. Data was log-normalized, cell cycle regressed and scaled for analysis. Dimensionality reduction and Lei-
den clustering as well as subclustering were conducted choosing parameters based on PCA elbow plot. All further analyses were
conducted as described for Smart-seq2 above.
Clonal tracking with barcoded single cell readout
For clonal in vivo tracking of hSSCs, lentivirally barcoded hSSC-derived graft cell suspensions were processed according to stan-
dard 10X Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3ʹ GEM kit (10X Genomics Inc, v3.1). To amplify clonal barcode sequences (Cellecta,
Cat#BCXP10M3VP-P) a separate PCR with cDNA after the ampliﬁcation step (before ligation) was performed, since the 10X protocol
only requires 25% of cDNA for the standard protocol. The extra 10 mL of cDNA were ampliﬁed using a combination of Partial Read 1
primer (5’-CTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCT-3’) and an adaptor-FBP1 (Read 2 primer + barcode recognition site) primer (5’-
GTGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCTCCGACCACCGAACGCAACGCACGCA-3’). Barcode ampliﬁcation was run as
recommended for cDNA reaction (10X protocol step 2.2) plus 4 extra cycles. From there the product was handled as per standard
protocol starting from the index primer reaction without any fragmentation or ligation steps. Amplicon libraries were then sequenced
via MiSeq. After demultiplexing, 10X barcodes and clonal barcodes were read out and matched to 10X barcoded cells in the regular
analysis as described and deposited at GitHub (https://github.com/sahoo00/Clonetracker, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
14823191, v1.0.1). Brieﬂy, the FBP1 ﬂanking sequence was used to locate the Clone Barcode ID in the reverse strand. Unique
Cell barcode IDs were extracted from the ﬁrst 28 nt-sequences of the forward strand. The extracted Clone Barcode ID reads
were matched against the known Cellecta barcode library and only reads with barcodes that matched the Cellecta library were
kept. The Cell Barcode ID and Clone Barcode ID were combined and stored in a fastq ﬁle. The fastq ﬁles were ﬁltered using quality
information. The ﬁrst 16 nt-sequences from this fastq ﬁle represent the Cell barcode ID, while the last 48-nt sequences are the Clone
Barcode ID. The Cell Barcodes and Clone Barcodes were clustered using the DNACLUST tool. Scanpy (version 1.9.1.) was used and
cells were quality ﬁltered only keeping cells with a gene count of >500 and < 6000 with less than 20% mitochondrial and 35% ribo-
somal gene content as well as running Scrublet leaving 745 high quality cells (433 unique barcodes) of grafts derived from growth
plate hSSCs and 509 high quality cells (343 unique barcodes) from periosteal hSSCs with an average gene count of 3,178 and
3,171 per cell, respectively. Clonal barcodes for all ﬁltered cells were identiﬁed. Analysis was conducted as described above for
10X single cell RNA-sequencing data. We were able to recover 150 GP hSSCs and 85 PE hSSCs of the initial 3x500 transplanted
hSSCs from each subregion. Cells were only counted as clones if the identical barcode appeared in at least two single cells of which
at least one cell could be identiﬁed as a hSSC, yielding a recovery of 46 clones for growth plate hSSCs and 21 clones for periosteal
hSSCs. For trajectory inference scvelo (version 0.2.5.) was used.
StepMiner for Boolean Analysis
StepMiner is a computational tool that identiﬁes step-wise transitions in a time-series data.55 StepMiner performs an adaptive regres-
sion scheme to identify the best possible step up or down based on sum-of-square errors. The steps are placed between time points
at the sharpest change between low expression and high expression levels, which gives insight into the timing of the gene expres-
sion-switching event. To ﬁt a step function, the algorithm evaluates all possible step positions, and for each position, it computes the
average of the values on both sides of the step for the constant segments. An adaptive regression scheme is used that chooses the
step positions that minimize the square error with the ﬁtted data. Finally, a regression test statistic is computed as follows:
F stat =
P
n
i = 1
ð bXi  XÞ2.
ðm  1Þ
P
n
i = 1
ðXi  bXiÞ2.
ðn  mÞ
Where Xi for i = 1 to n are the values, bXi for i = 1 to n are ﬁtted values. m is the degrees of freedom used for the adaptive regression
analysis. X is the average of all the values: X = 1
n  Pn
j = 1 Xj: For a step position at k, the ﬁtted values bXl are computed by using
1
k  Pn
j = 1 Xj for i = 1 to k and
1
ðn  kÞ  Pn
j = k+1 Xj for i = k + 1 to n.
Discovery of Boolean Implication Relationships (BIRs)
Boolean logic is a simple mathematical relationship of two values, i.e., high/low, 1/0, or positive/negative. The Boolean analysis of
gene expression data requires the conversion of expression levels into two possible values. The StepMiner algorithm is reused to
perform Boolean analysis of gene expression data.56 The Boolean analysis is a statistical approach which creates binary logical in-
ferences that explain the relationships between phenomena. Boolean analysis is performed to determine the relationship between
the expression levels of pairs of genes (Figures S6A and S6B). The StepMiner algorithm is applied to gene expression levels to
convert them into Boolean values (high and low). In this algorithm, ﬁrst the expression values are sorted from low to high and a rising
step function is ﬁtted to the series to identify the threshold. Middle of the step is used as the StepMiner threshold. This threshold is
used to convert gene expression values into Boolean values. A noise margin of 2-fold change is applied around the threshold to deter-
mine intermediate values, and these values are ignored during Boolean analysis. In a scatter plot, there are four possible quadrants
based on Boolean values: (low, low), (low, high), (high, low), (high, high). A Boolean implication relationship is observed if any one of
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823.e1–e11, May 1, 2025
e8

the four possible quadrants or two diagonally opposite quadrants are sparsely populated. Based on this rule, there are six kinds of
Boolean implication relationships. Two of them are symmetric: equivalent (corresponding to the positively correlated genes), oppo-
site (corresponding to the highly negatively correlated genes). Four of the Boolean relationships are asymmetric, and each corre-
sponds to one sparse quadrant: (low => low), (high => low), (low => high), (high => high). BooleanNet statistics is used to assess
the sparsity of a quadrant and the signiﬁcance of the Boolean implication relationships.56,57 Given a pair of genes A and B, four quad-
rants are identiﬁed by using the StepMiner thresholds on A and B by ignoring the Intermediate values deﬁned by the noise margin of
2-fold change (+/- 0.5 around StepMiner threshold). Number of samples in each quadrant are deﬁned as a00, a01, a10, and a11 which is
different from X in the previous equation of F stat. Total number of samples where gene expression values for A and B are low is
computed using the following equations.
nAlow = ða00 + a01Þ; nBlow = ða00 + a10Þ;
Total number of samples considered is computed using following equation.
total = a00 + a01 + a10 + a11
Expected number of samples in each quadrant is computed by assuming independence between A and B. For example, expected
number of samples in the bottom left quadrant e00 = bn is computed as probability of A low ((a00 + a01)/total) multiplied by probability of
B low ((a00 + a10)/total) multiplied by total number of samples. The following equation is used to compute the expected number of
samples where ij can be 00, 01, 10, 11.
n = aij; bn = ðnAlow = total  nBlow = totalÞ  total
To check whether a quadrant is sparse, a statistical test for (e00 > a00) or (bn > nÞ is performed by computing S00 and p00 using
following equations. A quadrant is considered sparse if S00 is high (bn > nÞ and p00 is small. Sij is used in the following equation where
ij can be 00, 01, 10, 11.
Sij = bn  n
ﬃﬃﬃ
bn
p
p00 = 1
2

a00
ða00+a01Þ +
a00
ða00+a10Þ

A suitable threshold is chosen for Sij > sThr and pij < pThr to check sparse quadrant with an acceptable false discovery rate
(FDR < 0.001). A Boolean implication relationship is identiﬁed when a sparse quadrant is discovered using the following equation.
Boolean Implication = (Sij > sThr, pij < pThr) where ij can be 00, 01, 10, 11 (see below).
A relationship is called Boolean equivalent if top-left and bottom-right quadrants are sparse.
Equivalent = ðS01 > sThr; p01 < pThr; S10 > sThr; p10 < pThrÞ
Boolean opposite relationships have sparse top-right (a11) and bottom-left (a00) quadrants.
Opposite = ðS00 > sThr; p00 < pThr; S11 > sThr; p11 < pThrÞ
Boolean equivalent and opposite are symmetric relationship because the relationship from A to B is same as from B to A. Asym-
metric relationship forms when there is only one quadrant sparse (A low => B low: top-left; A low => B high: bottom-left; A high => B
high: bottom-right; A high => B low: top-right). These relationships are asymmetric because the relationship from A to B is different
from B to A. For example, A low => B low and B low => A low are two different relationships.
A low => B high is discovered if the bottom-left (a00) quadrant is sparse and this relationship satisﬁes following conditions.
A low = > B high = ðS00 > sThr; p00 < pThrÞ
Similarly, A low => B low is identiﬁed if the top-left (a01) quadrant is sparse.
A low = > B low = ðS01 > sThr; p01 < pThrÞ
A high => B high Boolean implication is established if the bottom-right (a10) quadrant is sparse as described below.
A high = > B high = ðS10 > sThr; p < pThrÞ
Boolean implication A high => B low is found if the top-right (a11) quadrant is sparse using following equation.
A high = > B low = ðS11 > sThr; p11 < pThrÞ
For each quadrant a statistic Sij and an error rate pij is computed. Sij > sThr and pij < pThr are the thresholds used on the BooleanNet
statistics to identify Boolean implication relationships where ij can be 00, 01, 10, 11.
Boolean analyses in the test dataset GSE119087 uses a threshold of sThr = 3 and pThr = 0.1. False discovery rate is computed for
these thresholds (FDR < 0.000001) by using randomly permuting gene expression data in GSE119087.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
e9
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823.e1–e11, May 1, 2025
Boolean Network Explorer (BoNE)
Boolean network explorer (BoNE) provides an integrated platform for the construction, visualization and querying of a network of pro-
gressive changes underlying a disease or a biological process in two steps (Figure S6C): First, the expression levels of all genes in
these datasets were converted to binary values (high or low) using the StepMiner algorithm. Second, gene expression relationships
between pairs of genes were classiﬁed into one-of-six possible Boolean Implication Relationships (BIRs), two symmetric and four
asymmetric, and expressed as Boolean implication statements. This offers a distinct advantage from conventional computational
methods (Bayesian, Differential, etc.) that rely exclusively on symmetric linear relationships in networks. The other advantage of using
BIRs is that they are robust to the noise of sample heterogeneity (i.e., healthy, diseased, genotypic, phenotypic, ethnic, interventions,
disease severity) and every sample follows the same mathematical equation, and hence is likely to be reproducible in independent
validation datasets. In the resultant Boolean implication network, BoNE enables data science in both unsupervised and supervised
way while remaining agnostic to the sample type.
Boolean implication network construction
Boolean implication analysis was performed in the large diverse human dataset GSE119087 (n = 25,955 human samples,
Figures S6D and S6E). First, gene expression levels were converted to Boolean values (high and low) using StepMiner algorithm.
The expression values are sorted from low to high and a rising step function is ﬁtted to the series to identify the threshold. The relation-
ship between two genes was evaluated in the context of high and low values. These relationships are called Boolean implication re-
lationships (BIRs) because they are represented by logical implication (=>) formula. BooleanNet statistics is used to assess the sig-
niﬁcance of the Boolean implication relationships. S > 3 and p < 0.1 are the thresholds (False Discovery Rate < 0.0001) used on the
BooleanNet statistics during the data analysis to identify Boolean implication relationships. We relaxed this threshold S>3 and
p < 0.15 to identify Boolean Equivalent relationships. A noise margin of 2-fold change is applied around the threshold to determine
intermediate values and these values are ignored during Boolean analysis. StepMiner threshold is denoted in red color and the noise
margin is denoted in light blue colors in scatterplots analyzing Boolean relationships between genes. The Boolean implication
network contains the six possible Boolean relationships between genes in the form of a directed graph with nodes as genes and
edges as the Boolean relationship between the genes. The nodes in the Boolean implication network (BIN) are genes and the edges
correspond to BIRs. Equivalent and Opposite relationships are denoted by undirected edges and the other four types (low => low;
high => low; low => high; high => high) of BIRs are denoted by having a directed edge between them.
Boolean paths
The asymmetric BIRs provide a unique dimension to the network that is fundamentally different from any other gene expression net-
works in the literature. Traversing a set of nodes in a directed graph of the Boolean network constitutes a Boolean path that can be
interpreted as follows. A simple Boolean path involves two nodes and the directed edge between them (Figure S6F). This simple
Boolean path can be interpreted as follows. For the nodes X and Y with X low => Y low only quadrant #(low, high) is sparse; the other
quadrants are ﬁlled with samples. Assuming monotonicity in X and Y, the quadrants can be ordered in two possible ways: (low, low)-
(high, low)-(high, high) and (high, high)-(high, low)-(low, low). The path corresponds to (low, low)-(high, low)-(high, high) begins with X
low and Y low. This is interpreted as X turns on ﬁrst and then Y turns on along a hypothetical biological path deﬁned by the sample
order. Similarly, Y turns off ﬁrst and then X turns off in the path (high, high)-(high, low)-(low, low). A complex path in the Boolean
network involves more than one Boolean implication relationship (Figures S6G and S6H). Three Boolean implication relationships
can be used to group samples into ﬁve bins and the bins can be ordered in two possible ways (forward, reverse).
Boolean Implication Network and BTR
A curated list of known bone processes-related genes was combined with selected genes of the top differentially expressed genes
(p-value < 0.05, LogFC >1.16 and <-1.16; total of 139 genes) within each analyzed group (functional vs. dysfunctional hSSCs). Genes
were grouped according to their expression for displaying results of the complex Boolean implication network (BIN). A complex BIN
(Complex-BIN) was created by identifying all signiﬁcant pairwise Boolean implication relationships (BIRs) derived from a large data-
base (25,955 datastets) of publicly available microarrays of human tissues, diseases, and cell lines (GSE119087). A previously pub-
lished BooleanNet algorithm was performed to determine the BIRs between genes. Brieﬂy, the BooleanNet algorithm identiﬁes the
type of BIR by searching the sparsely populated quadrant(s) using a statistical threshold S and likelihood error rate p in a scatterplot
between two genes. These relationships are called BIRs because they are represented by logical implication (0) formula. There are
six types of BIR: high 0 high, low 0 low, high 0 low, low 0 high, equivalent, and opposite. The ﬁrst four are asymmetric and have
only one sparse quadrant while the latter two are symmetric and have two sparse quadrants. S>3 and p<0.15 are the thresholds used
on the BooleanNet statistics for symmetric BIRs. For asymmetric BIRs, S > 3 and p<0.10 is used. The Complex-BINs are displayed in
the form of a directed graph where edges (arrows) correspond to the observed BIRs between genes and nodes representing genes.
To simplify and reduce the size of Complex-BIN, we used Boolean equivalent relationships to cluster genes. There are three zones in
each Boolean Implication network (two zones for analyzed groups and one for the shared genes between those two groups). First, we
found Boolean equivalent relationships within each zone, then we found Boolean equivalent relationships between different zones.
Finally, we clustered all connected components between zones into one clustered-node in the shared zone (each member of the
clustered-node is labeled as a shared gene regardless of their original group). We identiﬁed relationships between clustered-nodes
and the remaining genes by combining the BIRs of members for each clustered-node to build the Clustered-BIN. Next, we selected
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823.e1–e11, May 1, 2025
e10

four BIRs ( high=>high, high=>low, opposite and low=>low) to simplify the Clustered-BIN by traversing the entire graph by running a
depth-ﬁrst search to ﬁnd all transitive complex pathways. Each complex pathway was formed from a chain of high=>high BIR,
followed by a high=>low or opposite BIR followed by a chain of low=>low BIR. As the starting point a gene from one of the analyzed
groups (zones) was chosen following a path through shared genes and ending in the opposite analyzed group (zone). The simple
paths containing three BIRS of high=>high, high=>low and low=>low is interpreted in the context of the previously published
MiDReG algorithm (Figures S6F–S6H). Ordering of the genes was performed using the asymmetric BIRs and MiDReG algorithm.
The simpliﬁed Clustered-BIN helped to gain predicted orders of genes between analyzed groups. In the ﬁnal step, all cells relevant
to the analyzed groups and all genes in each selected complex pathway from the simpliﬁed Clustered-BIN were used in BoolTraineR
(BTR), an algorithm for rebuilding and training the asynchronous Boolean model (Figure S6I). BTR uses a Boolean State Space (BSS)
scoring function such that the predicted model can resemble a single-cell expression dataset. Furthermore, because of the conver-
sion of expression levels to two possible values of 0/1, Boolean models are relatively robust to the presence of dropouts. The initial
expression state (Boolean value) of each gene in the beginning of the selected pathways of MiDReG algorithm was used as an initial
state for BTR model learning. We also used the BIRs between genes in each selected pathway as an initial Boolean model to start the
search. Finally, BTR returned the closest predicted model based on the single-cell dataset. The code has been deposited at GitHub
(https://github.com/sahoo00/Invariant-Circuits, [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14823193], v1.0.1).
Boolean Equivalent Correlated Clusters (BECC)
BECC was used to identify gene clusters that share invariant relationships with a seed gene.38 We used ACTA2 as a seed gene and a
publicly available 25,955 diverse human samples downloaded from GEO (GSE119087) to identify and validate an invariant signature
for ﬁbroblast-like cells. The algorithm ﬁrst computes a list of genes that have a Boolean Equivalent relationship with the seed gene.
The list of genes was then expanded by performing Boolean analysis by following the Boolean equivalent relationship two more
times. In the second step, a score for each gene in the ﬁnal list was computed from the correlation coefﬁcient and the slope of
the ﬁtted line comparing with the pre-deﬁned seed gene. Finally, a threshold was imposed using the StepMiner algorithm to deﬁne
a list of high-conﬁdence genes with potentially superior performance than the seed gene. Once deﬁned, all gene clusters were sub-
sequently validated across global, bone tissues, and pathological bone diseases in human and murine datasets. This effort resulted in
a ranked list of 33 probesets, corresponding to 25 unique genes, based on similarity to ACTA2 (with probeID = 200974_at). TAGLN
and MYL9 showed strong correlation patterns with the seed gene and each other in many validation datasets. The results of the
BECC algorithm on human, bone-related and other species datasets can be explored via http://hegemon.ucsd.edu/Misc/
biomarkers/bone.php?go=hs. We also used BECC to ﬁnd invariant markers for osteogenic and chondrogenic hSSCs but no
high-conﬁdence gene could be found.
Quantiﬁcation and statistical analysis
Statistics and reproducibility
All data presented were validated with multiple experimental replicates and plotted as stated in the ﬁgure or ﬁgure legend. Two-
tailed Student’s t-tests were performed with corrections for non-normality (Mann-Whitney test) or unequal variances (Welch’s
test) where appropriate, using GraphPad Prism v.9.5.1 (GraphPad Software). For more than two groups, one-way ANOVA with
appropriate posthoc tests as indicated in the ﬁgure legends was used. No statistical method was used to predetermine sample
size. No method of randomization was used. The investigators were partially blinded to allocation during experiments or outcome
assessment.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Resource
e11
Cell Stem Cell 32, 811–823.e1–e11, May 1, 2025
Cell Stem Cell, Volume 32
Supplemental Information
Human skeletal development and regeneration
are shaped by functional diversity of stem cells
across skeletal sites
Thomas H. Ambrosi, Sahar Taheri, Kun Chen, Rahul Sinha, Yuting Wang, Ethan J.
Hunt, L. Henry Goodnough, Matthew P. Murphy, Holly M. Steininger, Malachia Y.
Hoover, Franco Felix, Kelly C. Weldon, Lauren S. Koepke, Jan Sokol, Daniel Dan
Liu, Liming Zhao, Stephanie D. Conley, Wan-Jin Lu, Maurizio Morri, Norma F.
Neff, Noelle L. Van Rysselberghe, Erika E. Wheeler, Yongheng Wang, J. Kent
Leach, Augustine Saiz, Aijun Wang, George P. Yang, Stuart Goodman, Julius A.
Bishop, Michael J. Gardner, Derrick C. Wan, Irving L. Weissman, Michael T.
Longaker, Debashis Sahoo, and Charles K.F. Chan

Cell #
scApproach
Gender
Age
Sample
#
366
Smart-seq2
Female
17 weeks 
(gest.)
Fetal 1
1
1340
Smart-seq2
Female
20 weeks 
(gest.)
Fetal 2
2
870
Smart-seq2
Female
18 weeks 
(gest.)
Fetal 3
3
885
Smart-seq2
Female
17 weeks 
(gest.)
Fetal 4
4
1,254
10X 
Genomics
Female
17 weeks 
(gest.)
Fetal 5
5
58,377
CosMx
Female
20 weeks 
(gest.)
Fetal 6
6
88
Smart-seq2
Female
18 years
Fracture tissue 1
7
164
Smart-seq2
Male
25 years
Fracture tissue 2
8
23
Smart-seq2
Male
27 years
Fracture tissue 3
9
131
Smart-seq2
Male
28 years
Fracture tissue 4
10
25
Smart-seq2
Female
30 years
Fracture tissue 5
11
46
Smart-seq2
Male
32 years
Fracture tissue 6
12
71
Smart-seq2
Female
34 years
Fracture tissue 7
13
91
Smart-seq2
Female
39 years
Fracture tissue 8
14
43
Smart-seq2
Male
53 years
Fracture tissue 9
15
74
Smart-seq2
Female
61 years
Fracture tissue 10
16
74
Smart-seq2
Female
63 years
Fracture tissue 11
17
54
Smart-seq2
Female
65 years
Fracture tissue 12
18
39
Smart-seq2
Female
67 years
Fracture tissue 13
19
241
Smart-seq2
Male
72 years
Fracture tissue 14
20
79
Smart-seq2
Female
77 years
Fracture tissue 15
21
32
Smart-seq2
Male
65 years
Femoral periosteum
22
43
Smart-seq2
Male
51 years
Nonunion 1
23
37
Smart-seq2
Female
59 years
Nonunion 2
24
107
Smart-seq2
Female
60 years
Nonunion 2
25
90
Smart-seq2
Female
62 years
Nonunion 4
26
9,301
10X 
Genomics
Male
63 years
Nonunion 5
27
49
Smart-seq2
Female
30 years
Fibrous Dysplasia 
(mandible/maxillary 
bone)
28
Table S1. Individual human skeletal specimens used in human skeletal stem cell scRNAseq analyses, 
Related to Figures 1-5.
Table S1. Individual human skeletal specimens used in human skeletal stem cell
scRNAseq analyses, related to Figures 1-5. Individual human skeletal specimens used
in human single cell sequencing studies. (gest.: gestational age; sc: single cell)

Figure S1. Skeletal site-specific diversity of hSSC, Related to Figure 1.
C
hSSC
hOP
hCP
Fetal tendon: 
prospective populations
Crystal 
Violet
Alizarin 
Red S
Alcian 
Blue
GP+PE
Phalange
Pelvis
Tendon
Vertebral
Bone
Vertebral
Disc
Crystal 
Violet
Alizarin 
Red S
Alcian 
Blue
Frontal
Skull
Parietal 
Skull
Sutures
% of non-hematopoietic
0
5
10
15
B
G
H
D
E
F
0
10
20
30
40
50
CFU (%)
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
AR OD450
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
AB OD590
Colony formation
Osteogenesis
Chondrogenesis
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p=0.0004
p=0.0275
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p=0.0101
p=0.0428
p=0.0149
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p=0.0001
p=0.0304
p=0.0097
p=0.001
p=0.0198
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p=0.0059
p<0.0001 p<0.0001p<0.0001
p=0.0011
p<0.0005
p=0.0131
p<0.0001
p=0.007
p<0.0001
p=0.0209
p=0.0206
p=0.0059
p<0.0001
p=0.005
p<0.0001
p=0.0024
p<0.0001 p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p=0.0001
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p<0.0001p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p=0.0016
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p=0.0027
p<0.0001
Fetal tendon 
hSSC
Bone
Fibro.
Hematopoietic
cells
Stroma
BioOss
Fetal tendon 
non-hSSCs/hBCSPs
BioOss
Stroma
Fibro.
A Representative 
gating strategy
CD45/CD235a/DAPI: PB
CD164: PE
PDPN: APC
CD31/Tie2: APC-Cy7
47.3%
41.1%
6.66%
hSSC
0
104
105
0
105
103
0
105
103
0
103
105
0
103
104
0
105
103
47.1%
2.6%
hBCSP
hOP
CD146: PE-Cy7
CD73: FITC
hCP
singlets
hBCSP: human bone cartilage stroma progenitor
hCP: human chondroprogenitors
hOP: human osteo-stromal progenitor
In vivo graft
SKIL
HIC1
Chondro. SSC marker
Stromal SSC marker
I
J
Vertebral Bone
Vertebral Disc
Pelvis
Periosteum
Phalange
Tendon
Suture
Parietal Skull
Frontal Skull
Growth Plate
CXCL14
NME6
CNST
SCRN1
SFRP4
HAPLN1
DLK1
STAT3
ACAN
PRRX1
ACTA2
PTHLH
MX1
IL33
hSSC markers
Other literature 
candidates
0 0.5 1
Mean
Fraction %
>60
40
20
SOX5
GDF5
VB (95.1%)
FSK (92.4)
PSK (92.7%)
SUT (91.3%)
GP (100%)
PEL (94.2%)
PE (94.3%) 
PHA (94.8%)
TEN (89.5%)
VD (92.4%
Correlation matrix
K
Intramembranous hSSC
Endochondral hSSC
hSSC source
Leiden
Pseudotime trajectory
1
3
2
4
3
2
hSSC source
Leiden
1
FA1
FA2
early
late
Pseudotime
lo
hi
SKIL
COL2A1
FMO1
BGLAP
CXCL12
GP
PEL
PHA
VB
VD
PE
PSK
FSK
SUT
TEN
Pseudotime trajectory
HIC1
COL2A1
FMO1
BGLAP
CXCL12
Stem
Chondro.
Osteo.
Stromal
Fibro.
Stem
Chondro.
Osteo.
Stromal
Fibro.
R
N
L
Cranial hSSCs
SHOX
GDF5
CTSK
DDR2
TWIST1
FSK
PSK
SUT
Neural
crest
Mes.
Top100 genes by Leiden cluster
VB
FSK
PSK
SUT
GP
PEL
PE
PHA
TEN
VD
1-Chondro
3-Osteo
2-Stromal
4-Fibro
-3
3
0
Limb
Mes.
Cranial
markers
LHX9
PRRX1
MESP1
ZIC1
FOXC1
MSX2
AXIN2
SIX2
MSX1
COL4A2
TSHZ2
TBX3
PAX3
BMP5
COL4A1
1-Chondro
3-Osteo
2-Stromal
4-Fibro
CXCL12
KITLG
ANGPTL1
VCAN
IL6
IL7
IL11
CXCL2
VEGFB
DPP4
EPHB2
JAG1
VEGFA
Niche support factor
M
TNC
THBS4
TPPP3
PDGFRA
PDGFRB
TNMD
TNXB
Tendon 
hSSCs
SCX
PRKG1
PLAU
CD44
P
Cranial hSSC marker genes
0
0.2
Median
O
adj. p-val.
Endochondral Ossification
8.6e-10
Collagen Biosynthesis
5.9e-9
Integrins in Angiogenesis
1.6e-8
Beta-1 Integrin Cell Surface Interactions      1.1e-12
ECM-receptor Interaction
1.4e-12
Axon Guidance
4.8e-10
IL11 pathway
0.00297
TWEAK Regulation of Gene Expression      0.00297
Developmental biology
0.00297
TGF-beta Regulation of Extracellular Matrix  4.5e-8
Collagen Biosynthesis
6.9e-8
Extracellular Matrix Organization
2.3e-7
Pathway enrichment analysis
1
2
3
4
Q
S
FGFR2 (osteopenia)
Bent-Bone dysplasia
XYLT1 (short stature, scoliosis)
Desbuquois dysplasia
DDR2 (short stature)
Dwarfism
TNFRSF11B (fragile, deformed skeleton)
Juvenile Paget’s
CDT1 (narrow Fracture tissues, cranial defects)
Meier-Gorlin syndrome 
KAT6B (joint contractures/abnormal patella)
Genitopatellar syndrome
SEC24D (bone fragility/abnormalities)
Craniosynostosis
ENPP1 (rickets)
Chondrocalcinosis
IHH (short fingers)
Brachydactyly
KIF22 (spinal deformity)
Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia
ZIC1 (craniosynostosis, scoliosis)
Osteogenesis imperfecta type 19
EDNRA (mandibular hypoplasia)
Mandibulofacial dysostosis with alopecia
IFITM5 (bone fragility)
Craniosynostosis/Cole-Carpenter syndrome
GSC (pelvic/craniofacial abnormality)
SAMS
Norm. mean
max
min
Figure S1. Skeletal site-specific diversity of hSSC, Related to Figure 1. (A) Representative FACS gating of
hSSC lineage populations gated from singlets for living (DAPI-), non-hematopoietic (CD45-CD235a-), non-
endothelial (CD31-TIE2-) cells. (B) Quantification of hSSC frequency of different fetal source tissues. (n = 1-4
donors). (C) Representative staining of CFU-F (top; Crystal violet), osteogenic (middle; Alizarin Red S) and
chondrogenic (bottom; Alcian Blue) in vitro assays of prospectively isolated hSSCs from hSSCs of different fetal
skeletal tissues. (D) Quantification of CFU-F assay. (n = 3-7) (E) Quantification of osteogenic assay. (n = 4-6). (F)
Quantification of chondrogenic assay. (n = 2-4). (G) Representative staining of CFU-F (top; Crystal violet),
osteogenic (middle; Alizarin Red S) and chondrogenic (bottom; Alcian Blue) in vitro assays of prospectively
isolated skeletal lineage populations from fetal tendon tissue. (H) Representative H&E staining of a tissue section
of an 8-week-old subcutaneous graft derived from tendon hSSCs able to support host-derived hematopoiesis as
well as non-stem cell tendon populations forming fibrostromal tissues. (I) Dotplot of stem cell marker expression
of hSSCs as defined for long bone hSSCs in this study using scRNAseq (left) and expression of markers
previously used to enrich for bone stem cell-like population as found in single hSSCs from different skeletal sites
(right). (J) Umap of hSSC single cell expression of Osteo./Chondro. hSSC marker SKIL and Fibro./Stromal hSSC
marker HIC1 in hSSCs from different skeletal sites. (K) ScRNAseq correlation matrix of hSSCs from different
fetal skeletal sites. Percentage of shared gene expression compared to growth plate SSCs shown. (L) Tracksplot of
neural crest and mesoderm marker genes as found in single fetal hSSCs from frontal skull, parietal skull and suture
tissue. (M) Matrixplot showing enhanced gene expression of hematopoiesis-supporting factors in stromal hSSCs
compared to other subtypes. (N) Heatmap of top100 genes per Leiden cluster and their expression in hSSCs from
different fetal skeletal tissues. (O) Stacked violin plots of marker genes for FSK, PSK and Suture hSSCs. (P)
Tracksplot of tendon-related marker genes as found in tendon-derived single fetal hSSCs. (Q) Gene pathway
enrichment analysis within Leiden clusters. (R) ForceAtlas2 clustering of fetal hSSCs sub-grouped for
endochondral (left) and intramembranous (right) hSSCs showing Leiden cluster, PAGA trajectory inference and
specific marker gene expression. (S) Gene expression of hSSCs from different fetal skeletal source tissues related
to diseases with skeletal phenotypes shown as matrixplot. Plotted data shown as mean+standard deviation of the
mean (SEM). Significance assessed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s posthoc test.

Figure S2: Identification and characterization of hSSC variants and lineage subtypes, Related to Figure 2.
K
SSC
preBCSP
BCSP
SPC
OPC
FA1
FA2
SOX9
COL2A1
ACAN
CNST
DLK1
FBN2
CXCL12
THY1
Developmental potential
CytoTRACE score
0
1
0.5
n.s.
n.s.
D
E
OPC
SPC
PDPN: APC
CD146: PE-Cy7
hSSC
hBCSP
hOP
SSC
preBCSP
BCSP
hSSC
hBCSP
hOP
Index-leiden distribution
SSC
preBCSP
BCSP SPC
OPC
SPC
BCSP
SSC
preBCSP
BCSP
SPC OPC
F
all others p < 0.001
C
Alizarin Red S
BMSC
(unsorted)
SPC
OPC
SSC
In vitro osteogenesis
(5-day)
Bone
Stroma
In vivo ossicle formation
SPC
OPC
H&E
G
hSSC lineage tree
Bone-Cartilage-Stromal-Prog.
(hBCSP)
Skeletal Stem Cell (hSSC)
PDPN+
CD146+
PDPN-
CD146+
(human chondroprogenitors)
hOP (Osteostromal Prog.)
preBCSP
PDPN+
CD146-
CD73-/+
CD164-/+
PDPN+CD146-
CD164+CD73+
Chan et al. Cell 2018
A
H
I
Zone5/6
Chan et al. 2018
Zone1/2
Zone3/4
MKI67
PCNA
SOX9
COL2A1
ACAN
CNST
DLK1
FBN2
CXCL12
THY1
Prolif.
Chondro.
SSC
preBCSP
BCSP
SPC
OPC
BUB1
Mean exp.
0                    1 
Fracture tissue
Epiphyseal growth plate maturation
Diaphysis
Zone2
Zone3
Zone4
Zone5
Zone1
Zone6
Resting 
Pre-hypertrophic
Transitional
Proliferative
Hypertrophic
Zones:
Cell types:
SSC
preBCSP
BCSP
SPC & OPC
SSC
preBCSP
BCSP
SPC
OPC
Proliferation:
TOP2A
J
Gene:
Cell type:
hCP
SSC
preBCSP
BCSP
SPC
OPC
0
0.5
1
Mean
Fraction %
10
Putative stem cell markers
>60
40
20
30
50
B
Human SSC subtype gating
(CD45-CD235a-CD31-TIE2-PDPN+CD146-)
Fibro.
CD164low
CD73high
CD73
CD164
Chondro.
CD164low
CD73low
Osteo.
CD164high
CD73low
Stromal.
CD164high
CD73high
L
0
104
105
105
0
104
low
high
Fibro.
CD164lowCD73high
Chondro.
CD164lowCD73low
Osteo.
CD164highCD73low
Stromal.
CD164highCD73high
0
5
10
15
20
Relative to Chondro
(GAPDH normalized)
hSSC subpopulation
FBN1
0
0.5
1
1.5
Relative to Chondro
(GAPDH normalized)
HAPLN1
0
1
2
3
4
Relative to Chondro
(GAPDH normalized)
FMO1
0
1
2
3
SPP1
scRNAseq
qPCR
scRNAseq
qPCR
M
FBN1
SPP1
FMO1
HAPLN1
hSSC subpopulation
hSSC subpopulation
hSSC subpopulation
Relative to Chondro
(GAPDH normalized)
CD73
CD164
Lineage output of purified and osteo-induced fetal SSCs from different bone compartments
Chondro.: CD164lowCD73low Osteo.: CD164highCD73low Stromal.: CD164highCD73high Fibro.: CD164lowCD73high
CD146
PDPN
Growth Plate
Periosteum
Vertebra
Cranium
hBCSP
hOP
hCP
15.5
3.4
32.3
15
11.6
0.79
58.9
12.3
13.7
2.67
42.3
14.7
8.6
2.18
58.8
16.7
0.55
29.3
56.9
5.73
25.6
51.1
1.48
51.7
23
6.81
33.8
9.46
% of hSSCs
Composition
0 104
105
105
0
104
0
105
106
105
0
104
N
Bone-Cartilage-Stromal-Prog. (hBCSP)
Skeletal Stem Cell (hSSC)
PDPN+CD146-CD164low/highCD73low/high
PDPN+
CD146+
PDPN-CD146+
CD73-
hCP
OPC
updated
preBCSP
SPC
PDPN+CD146-
CD73-/+CD164-/+
PDPN-CD146hi
CD73low(CD164+)
O
Figure S2. Identification and characterization of hSSC variants and lineage subtypes, Related to Figure 2.
(A) Schematic of hSSC lineage tree as reported by Chan et al. Cell 2018 with cell surface marker expression of
each population. (B) Previously reported skeletal stem and progenitor cell markers as expressed throughout lineage
populations. (C) CytoTRACE analysis of scRNAseq data based on Leiden cluster annotated cell types and their
respective inferred developmental potential. Truncated violin plots. Significance by one-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s posthoc test. (D) Index-sort analysis of scRNAseq data from skeletal lineage populations based on Leiden
clusters. (E) Distribution of Leiden cluster populations within index-sorted prospective gates of hSSCs, hBCSPs
and hOPs. (F) Five-day in vitro osteogenesis of freshly purified bone marrow stromal cells (unsorted, plastic
adherent) and sorted hSSCs, OPCs (PDPN-CD146+CD73-), and SPCs (PDPN-CD146hiCD73lo) stained with
Alizarin Red S. (G) Eight-week in vivo ossicles formed by OPCs (PDPN-CD146+CD73-) and SPCs (PDPN-
CD146hiCD73lo) sectioned and stained for H&E. (H) Schematic of fetal growth plate with anatomical subregions
and distribution of scRNAseq data based annotated cell types based on previous gene expression data of
anatomically distinct GP zones. (I) GP zone-specific gene expression. (J) Proliferative gene marker expression in
annotated cell types. (K) Expression of selected genes in UMAP clustering of single skeletal stem cell lineage tree
populations. (L) Representative gating of hSSC subtypes within CD45-CD235a-CD31-TIE2-PDPN+CD146-
hSSCs. (M) Leiden clustering of scRNAseq data of prospectively isolated hSSC and confirmation of cluster
specific markers in prospectively isolated subpopulation based on variance in CD73/CD164 cell surface marker
expression. n=2 per population. Data shown as mean + SEM. (N) Flow cytometric readout of isolated hSSCs from
different skeletal sites treated with short-term pro-osteogenic stimuli in vitro and distribution of hSSC subtypes.
(O) Updated schematic of the human SSC lineage tree incorporating new findings. Scale bars = 50µm.

Figure S3: Distinct features and localization of growth plate and periosteal human skeletal stem cells, Related to Figure 3.
D
F
J
PE
GP
unseparated
PE
GP
Unseparated (GP+PE)
Top 250 genes
Unsorted Stromal Vascular Fractions
Epiphysis
Diaphysis
Periosteum
CFU-F
Osteogenesis
Metaphysis
Fetal long bone tissue
Epiphysis/
Growth Plate (GP)
Metaphysis
Diaphysis
Periosteum
Periosteal
hSSC
Growth Plate
hSSC
CFU-F
Osteogenesis
Chondrogenesis
C
A
B
0
10
20
30
40
50
CFU-F [%]
Growth plate
Periosteum
hSSC
hSSC
hCP hOP
hOP
hCP
P = 0.0535
P = 0.0049
P = 0.0097
P = 0.0354
K
hSSC interactions
GPPE
PEGP
PEPE
TGFB3 – (ACVR1+TGFBR1)
PTN – SDC4
POSTN – (ITGAV+ITGB5)
PDGFD - PDGFRB
PDGFA - PDGFRB
PDGFA - PDGFRA
NAMPT - INSR
NAMPT – (ITGA5+ITGB1)
MIF – ACKR3
MDK – SDC4
MDK – LRP1
IGF1 – IGF1R
CXCL12 – ACKR3
BMP5 – (ACVR1+BMPR2)
ANGPTL2 – (ITGA5+ITGB1)
max
min
Commun.
probability
P-value
< 0.05
< 0.01
GPGP
Dim1
Dim2
Signaling groups
Groups
1234
Commun.
probability
0.1
0.5
0.9
POSTN
PTN IGF
BMP
PDGF
NAMPT
MDK
CXCL
TGFBMIF
ANGPTL
Osteo./Chondro. hSSC
(GP-enriched)
Fibro./Stromal hSSC
(PE-enriched
high
UMAP1
UMAP2
low
POSTN
CXCL12
CTSK
ACTA2
MX1
MDK
PDGFRB
PDGFD
MIF
ACKR3
SDC4
IGF1
PTN
LRP1
BMP5
PE hSSCs
6
6
6
3
Interactions (#)
GP hSSCs
Strength (p-value)
1.14e-6
5.42e-9
1.09e-6
4.78e-7
PE hSSCs
GP hSSCs
CellChat
PDGFRA
PDGFRB
ACVR1,BMP2R
INSR
I
G
H
E
Chondro.
Fibro./Stromal
GP hSSCs
PE hSSCs
COL2A1
COL11A1
COL9A1
HAPLN1
CNMD
MATN3
SNORC
COMP
GDF5
CYTL1
SP7
PTH1R
MFAP4
DPT
POSTN
ANGPTL1
COL6A6
CXCL12
CD34
CD248
FBN1
IGF1
MEOX2
FBLN5
COL15A1
COL9A2
DCN
IGF1R
HDAC1
COL1A1
MFAP5
EGFR
CD34
EPHB2
EFNA5
FGFR13
Chondro.
Osteo.
Periost./Perichondrium
Bone marrow
Myofibroblastic
0
50
100
Whole 
tissue
GP 
PE 
Cell cluster distribution (%)
L
M
O
SOX9+PDGFRA+ cells
Receptor cells
lo
hi
Mean
PE subregion
COL1A1-ITGA5
PE subregion
FGF13-FGFR1
COL9A2-ITGA9,ITGB1
GP subregion
GP subregion
EFNA5-EPHA3
N
UMAP1
UMAP2
Chondro.
SOX9+PDGFRA+
Osteo.
SOX9+PDGFRA+
Bone Marrow
SOX9+PDGFRA+
Myofibroblast.
SOX9+PDGFRA+
Periost./Perichondrium
SOX9+PDGFRA+
subregions
Figure S3. Distinct features and localization of growth plate and periosteal human skeletal stem cells,
Related to Figure 3. (A) Photograph of human fetal long bone with annotated anatomical subregions (left).
Representative colony-forming unit fibroblasts (Crystal violet stain; top) and osteogenic potential (Alizarin red
stain; bottom) of stromal vascular fraction within defined anatomical subregions (right). (B) Representative
staining of CFU-F, osteogenic and chondrogenic in vitro assays of prospectively isolated hSSCs from GP or PE
fetal long bone tissue. (C) Quantification of colony-forming unit ability of prospectively isolated hSSCs, hCPs and
hOPs from GP and PE fetal long bone tissue. (n = 3-7). Data shown as mean + SEM. Comparisons by two-sided
Student’s t-test adjusted for non-normality (Mann-Whitney test) or unequal variances (Welch’s test) where
appropriate. (D) Heatmap of scRNAseq data top250 genes expressed in hSSCs from GP, PE or non-dissected fetal
long bone tissue. (E) Osteo./Chondro. and Fibro./Stromal hSSC marker genes and their expression in GP and PE
hSSCs. (F) Expression of periosteal marker genes in scRNAseq derived UMAP of Osteo./Chondro. and
Fibro./Stromal hSSCs. (G) CellChat algorithm analysis of scRNAseq data inferring ligand-receptor interactions
between Osteo./Chondro. and Fibro./Stromal hSSCs from GP and PE. (H) Strength of interactions as determined
by CellChat. (I) Overview of genes used to infer ligand-receptor interactions between hSSC subtypes. (J)
Probability of specific ligand-receptor interactions as determined by CellChat. (K) Ligand genes clustered by
signaling groups. (L) H&E stain of fetal phalange from an adjacent section used for Nanostring CosMX single cell
spatial analysis. (M) UMAP plot of cell clusters and cell cluster distribution within analyzed tissues in CosMX
analysis. (N) UMAP plots showing individual clusters with distribution of SOX9+PDGFRA+ cells (red). (O)
Expression of selected ligands in SOX9+PDGFRA+ cells in subregions as well as expression of respective receptors
in surrounding cells. Scale bar = 1mm.

Figure S4: In situ identification of hSSC subtypes and in vivo clonal tracking, Related to Figure 4.
FMO1
PDPN
DAPI
Frontal Skull
Parietal Skull
Suture
Vertebral Disc
Vertebral Bone
BM
Growth Plate
Periosteum
Vertebra
Disc
Vertebral
bone
scRNAseq hSSC
subtype distribution
VB
VD
0 20 40 60 80 100%
NP
AF
In situ
subtype distribution
Stromal.
Fibro.
Osteo.
VD
VB
Chondro.
B
BM
Growth Plate/
Perichondrium
SKIL (Chondro)
SPP1 (Osteo)
HIC1 (Stromal)
HIC1
PDPN
DAPI
SPP1
PDPN
DAPI
SKIL 
PDPN
DAPI
Periosteum
Frontal Skull
Parietal Skull
Suture
A
C
E
G
D
F
Vertebral Disc
Vertebral Bone
SKIL (Chondro)
SPP1 (Osteo)
HIC1 (Stromal)
HIC1
PDPN
DAPI
SPP1
PDPN
DAPI
SKIL 
PDPN
DAPI
HIC1
PDPN
DAPI
SPP1
PDPN
DAPI
SKIL (Chondro)
SPP1 (Osteo)
HIC1 (Stromal)
SKIL 
PDPN
DAPI
Fracture tissue
scRNAseq hSSC
subtype distribution
GP
PE
0 20 40 60 80100%
In situ
subtype distribution
AF
NP
GP/MP
PE
0 20 40 60 80100%
0 20 40 60 80100%
VB
VD
Growth
Plate
Periost/
Endosteum
Metaphysis (MP)
BM
Perichondrium
Fibro-hSSCs
Stromal-hSSC
Chondro-hSSC
Osteo-hSSCs
Cranium
scRNAseq hSSC
subtype distribution
0 20 40 60 80100%
FSK
PSK
SUT
SUT
PSK
Chondro.
Stromal.
Fibro.
Osteo.
In situ
subtype distribution
0 20 40 60 80100%
FSK
PSK
SUT
Intact
Growth Plate
removed
Periosteum 
removed
Fetal long bone tissue grafts 8-weeks post transplantation
N
O
Epiphysis/
Growth Plate (GP)
GP/Diaphysis
Fetal phalanges
dorsal subQ transplant
8-weeks
NSG pup
1 mm
L
GP SSC clones
PE SSC clones
% of total cells
Clonal size distribution
0
20
40
60
80
0
20
40
60
Top 10 clones: Cell type distribution
Cell type (%)
M
GP SSC
PE SSC
GP8
GP7
GP6
GP5
GP4
GP3
GP2
GP1
GP9
GP10
PE8
PE7
PE6
PE5
PE4
PE3
PE2
PE1
PE10
PE9
SSC
BCSP
CH
OS
SSC
BCSP
CHOS FS
0
20
40
60
80
100
Mean
0         1
J
K
SKIL
SOX9
GREM1
COL2A1
COL9A1
SNORC
ACAN
HAPLN1
MATN3
STAT3
CPM
DLK1
TCF4
ITGB1
FOXP1
PE hSSC
GP hSSC
UMAP1
UMAP2
lo
hi
CH
OS
SSC
BCSP
HIC1
SEMA5A
CXCL12
CDH11
SEMA5A
SKIL
CXCL12
SSC
FS
CH
OS
CDH11
BCSP
TXNIP
POSTN
MAF
COL1A1
VCAN
MYH10
FMO1
TNXB
HIC1
SOX9
GREM1
COL2A1
COL9A1
SNORC
ACAN
HAPLN1
MATN3
STAT3
CPM
DLK1
TCF4
ITGB1
FOXP1
TXNIP
POSTN
MAF
COL1A1
VCAN
MYH10
FMO1
TNXB
early
late
3. Graft excision
Imaging
Digest, sort, scRNAseq
Clonal analysis
500 barcoded cells (Venus+)
+ 5,000 SSC supporter cells
3 weeks
Freshly isolated 
GP or PE hSSCs
2. Transplantation
Lentiviral barcode  
library
1. Transduction
Re-sort
H
Single cell barcoding
I
GP hSSCs
PE hSSCs
Figure S4. In situ identification of hSSC subtypes and in vivo clonal tracking, Related to Figure 4. (A) H&E
staining of a human fetal long bone section depicting areas for in situ analysis (red squares) as well as composition
of hSSC subtypes in distinct subregions as inferred by scRNAseq and in situ readout (relative abundance based on
analyzed sections). (B) Representative in situ localization of chondrogenic (SKIL+PDPN+), osteogenic
(SPP1+PDPN+), and stromal (HIC1+PDPN+) hSSC subtypes in distinct anatomical regions of long bones. (C) H&E
staining of a human fetal vertebra section depicting areas for in situ analysis (red squares) as well as composition
of hSSC subtypes in distinct subregions as inferred by scRNAseq and in situ readout. NP: Nucleus pulposus, AP:
Annulus fibrosus. (D) In situ localization of chondrogenic (SKIL+PDPN+), osteogenic (SPP1+PDPN+), and stromal
(HIC1+PDPN+) hSSC subtypes in distinct anatomical regions of the spine. (E) H&E staining of a human fetal
cranial bone section depicting areas for in situ analysis (red squares) as well as composition of hSSC subtypes in
distinct subregions as inferred by scRNAseq and in situ readout. (F) In situ localization of chondrogenic
(SKIL+PDPN+), osteogenic (SPP1+PDPN+), and stromal (HIC1+PDPN+) hSSC subtypes in distinct anatomical
regions of the cranium. (G) In situ localization of the fibrogenic (FMO1+PDPN+) hSSC subtype in various skeletal
regions. All data is representative of tissue from two distinct donors across three sections per site. Scale bars =
25µm. (H) Schematic of experimental in vivo barcoding approach to track clonal dynamics of GP and PE hSSCs.
(I) Representative images of grafts with clonal colonies of barcoded and Venus-labeled hSSCs under the renal
capsule and brightfield image of graft under renal capsule (inset). Scale bar: 0.5 mm. (J) Matrixplot (left) and
UMAPs (right) showing trajectory inference and expression of cell type specific marker genes for barcoded GP
hSSC derived grafts. (K) Matrixplot (left) and UMAPs (right) showing trajectory inference and expression of cell
type specific marker genes for barcoded PE hSSC derived grafts. (L) Clonal size distribution of all clones
containing hSSCs and at least two cells with identical barcodes. GP n=46 and PE n=21. (M) Distribution of
cellular subsets within top 10 most abundant clones of GP and PE hSSCs. CH: chondrogenic; OS: osteostromal;
FS: fibrostromal. (N) Schematic of dorsal subcutaneous transplantation of fetal long bones elements into NSG
mice (left) and representative Movat’s Pentachrome staining of epiphyseal GP and diaphysis after explant of bones
8-weeks post-transplant. Scale bar: 5 mm. (O) Subcutaneous fetal long bone grafts 8-weeks post transplantation
either intact, or with prior removal of growth plate or periosteum. Top images show tissue sections with overview
stain. Bottom images are micro-CT images of graft tissue in vivo.

C1S
COL15A1
COL6A3
COL1A1
DC
PDGFRA
COL6A2
LAMA4
FBN1
COL1A2
TAGLN
COL3A1
POSTN
C1R
MXRA5
COL4A1
LUM
MMP2
ACTA2
COL5A2
MYL9
SPARCL1
RGS5
OLFML3
BGN
R
Functional group distribution
Fetal
18 yo
25 yo
27 yo
28 yo
30 yo
53 yo
32 yo
34 yo
39 yo
61 yo
63 yo
65 yo
65 yo PE
67 yo
72 yo
77 yo
30 yo FD
51 yo NU
59 yo NU
60 yo NU
62 yo NU
%
0
100
Functional
Impaired
Dysfunctional
Fetal
18 yo
25 yo
27 yo
28 yo
30 yo
53 yo
32 yo
34 yo
39 yo
61 yo
63 yo
65 yo
65 yo PE
67 yo
72 yo
77 yo
30 yo FD
51 yo NU
59 yo NU
60 yo NU
62 yo NU
Hierarchical
clustering
Figure S5: Aging manifests a fibrogenic lineage fate in human skeletal stem cells, Related to Figure 5.
I
J
UMAP1
UMAP2
SSPCs
Myofibroblast
CXCL12-RC
FAPs
Myogenic
Endothelial
Monocyte
Macrophage
T-Cell
Plasma Cell
CD4 T-Cell
Nonunion tissue
Distribution
Skeletal markers
Mean
0
1
Fraction %
20
10
B-Cell
ACTA2
COL1A1
TAGLN
CXCL12
FABP4
TTN
LYZ
CD63
SKAP1
IGKC
BANK1
hi
lo
PECAM1
20
40
60
80
100
0
1000
2000
3000
20
40
60
80
100
0
1000
2000
3000
0
20
40
60
0
0.5
1
0
20
40
60
0
10
20
30
40
20
40
60
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
40
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
0.5
1.0
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
0.5
1.0
BMI
n = 185
r =  -0.186
p = 0.0112
n = 115
r =  -0.164
p = 0.0798
n = 88
r =  -0.344
p = 0.001
n = 222
r = -0.0892
p = 0.1856
n = 155
r =  -0.223
p = 0.0053
n = 131
r =  -0.304
p = 0.0004
n = 304
r =  0.0147
p = 0.7988
n = 205
r =  -0.131
p = 0.0622
n = 162
r =  0.102
p = 0.1956
F
G
Osteogenesis
Osteogenesis
Osteogenesis
Frequency
Frequency
Frequency
CFU-F
CFU-F
CFU-F
BMI
BMI
hSSCs/104 CD45-CD235-
SSCs/104 CD45-CD235-
AR OD450
AR OD450
AR OD450
%
%
%
hSSCs/104 CD45-CD235-
% of seeded cells
Acute
(n = 270)
Nonunion
(n = 18)
CFU-F
p=0.0693
0
10
20
30
40
50
H
Age (years)
Age (years)
Age (years)
Acute
(n = 407)
Nonunion
(n = 20)
0
1x103
2x103
3x103
4x103
hSSCs/104 CD45-CD235-
p<0.0001
Frequency
A
hSSCs/104 CD45-CD235-
B
Age (years)
Age (years)
n = 407
r =  -0.153
p = 0.002
n = 270
r =  -0.194
p = 0.0013
%
20
40
60
80
100
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
Frequency
CFU-F
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
Frequency
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
0-6
7-14
>14
1,000
3,000
Days post injury
SSCs/104 CD45-CD235-
C
D
E
Osteogenesis
p=0.0001
Young
(<35years)
Aged
(36-64)
Geriatric
(>65)
0.0
0.5
1.0
AR OD450
Chondrogenesis
n = 46
r =  -0.559
p < 0.0001
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
Age (years)
Alcian Blue OD590
p=0.0003
hSSC
hCP
hOP
Osteo.
Chondro.
Representative 64-year-old
Age (years)
Age (years)
Age (years)
62 yo NU
60 yo NU
77 yo
72 yo
65 yo
63 yo
28 yo
25 yo
18 yo
27 yo
30 yo
32 yo
34 yo
39 yo
53 yo
61 yo
67 yo
65 yo PE
59 yo NU
no
cells
30 yo FD 51 yo NU
K
L
Fetal/Fx-Young
Fib.Dyspl.
Fx-Aged
Nonunion
PE-Aged
FD hSSC marker genes
GNAS
FBLN1
CADM1
OMD
CORIN
ACTA2
POSTN
PDGFD
CHN1
PTH1R
MSX1
BMPR1A
MYLK
TAGLN3
CD36
αSMA 
DAPI
Fx-funct. 
hSSC
FD hSSC
Split foot (HP:0001839)
0.0006866
Abnormality of primary teeth (HP:0006481)   0.0006866
Osteopenia (HP:0000938)
0.004054
Hypoplasia of the maxilla (HP:0000327)        0.02516
Carpal synostosis (HP:0009702)
0.03159
Recurrent fractures (HP:0002757)
0.03228
Human Phenotype Ontology
Name
adj. p-value
Fibrous Dysplasia
M
U
25,661 public human 
microarrays datasets
ACTA2
Seed gene
3-step Boolean Equivalence (BE)
ACTA2
Equivalent B
Gene
Sample 12…n
ACTA2
B
ACTA2
B
k times
51 Probesets
Ranking
&
Filtering
(CC)
33 Probesets
(25 genes)
Fibroblast-like phenotype associated candidate  genes
Boolean Equivalent Correlated Clusters (BECC)
Y
V
Chan et al. 2018
hSSC
(n=78)
GP Zones
(n=549)
GSE94736
BMSC
(n=28)
OS
(n=76)
GSE30699 GSE32981
MYL9
TAGLN
0
5
10
15
Healthy
Diseased
GSE6481
LMS
(n=6)
FS
(n=4)
MFH
(n=21)
OS
(n=12)
OS
(n=10)
Log2 expression
GSE14359
0
2
4
6
8
p=0.0104
MYL9
TAGLN
Bone tissue: GSE72815
Log2 expression
Log2 fold change
(vs. healthy control)
Bone tissue: GSE8406
OA
OA
OP
-0.5
0
0.5
OA
OA
OP
MYL9
TAGLN
Z
X
0
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
8
ANXA1 (log2)
COL2A1 (log2)
ACTA2 (log2)
0
2
4
6
8
Fib. Dyspl.
PE-Aged
FX-Aged
Young
Nonunion
Global dataset expression
TAGLN high => SKIL low
TAGLN high => SOX5 low
4
6
8
12
10
MYL9
MYL9
ANXA1 (log2)
TAGLN
ACTA2
TAGLN
4
8
6
10
12 14
4
8
6
10
12 14
SKIL
SOX5
TAGLN
4
6
8
10
3
5
6
7
9
8
4
No relation
ACTA2 (log2)
COL2A1 (log2)
4
6
8
10
14
12
4
6
8
10
12
6
10
14
6
10
14
ANXA1 (log2)
4
8
6
10 12 14
4
6
8
10
12
4
6
8
10
12
ANXA1 low => ACTA2 low
ACTA2 high => MYL9 high
TAGLN high => MYL9 high
TAGLN
MYL9
W
lo
hi
Mean
in group
1-Chondro.
hSSC subtypes (fetal)
2-Stromal.
3-Osteo.
4-Fibro.
lo
hi
Skeletal System Development (0001501)         
2.2e-17
Cartilage Development (0051216)
4.2e-11
Regulation of MSC Differentiation (2000739) 
4e-3
Pyruvate Metabolic Process (0006090)            
3.9e-7
Neg. Regulation of Apoptotic Process (0043069) 
3e-5
Pos. Regulation of Fibroblast Proliferation (0048146) 
1.1e-3
Extracellular Matrix Organization (0030198)             
2.1e-14
Neg. Regulation of Cell Motility (2000146)
4.8e-4
Reg. of Vascular Associated Smooth Muscle Cell Prolif. (1904705)
7.9e-3
GO Biological Processes
Funct.
Imp.
Dysf.
Funct.
Imp.
Dysf.
SKIL
HIC1
SOX9
CNMD
HAPLN1
SNORC
PRRX1
CTSK
hSSC markers
T
Adj. p-value
N
Young
Fx-Aged
Nonunion
Fib.Dyspl.
PE Aged
0
0.5
1
CytoTRACE score
p<0.0001
p<0.0001
p=0.0013
MYL9
FTL
MYL12A
MYL6
TAGLN
BMPR1A
MMP2
GSN
ASPN
LUM
PDGFRB
CCN5
COL1A1
MYLK
ACTA2
Mean
1
0
Leiden
Osteogenic readout
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
high
low
defect
no data
Q
11
9
12
10
O
P
S
Figure S5. Aging manifests a fibrogenic lineage fate in human skeletal stem cells, Related to Figure 5. (A) In
vitro multipotent differentiation capacity of prospectively isolated cell populations from aged patients. (B) Left:
Association of abundance of freshly isolated patient hSSCs and age of donor based on flow cytometric analysis of
freshly processed callus tissue (n = 407). Right: Association of CFU-F and patient age in primary hSSCs (n=270).
All correlations assessed by Spearman test. (C) Frequency of hSSC abundance in fracture callus tissue based on
FACS analysis. (0-6 days post injury, n=262; 7-14 days, n=93; >14 days, n=46) (D) In vitro mineralization
capacity of hSSCs grouped by patient age (young: <35 years, n=65; aged: 35-65 years, n=93; geriatric: >65 years,
n=62). Significances assessed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc test. (E) Association of chondrogenic in
vitro potential and age of hSSC donor. (F) Correlation of hSSC frequency, CFU-F capacity and in vitro osteogenic
capacity with age of patient separated into female and male donors. (G) Correlation of BMI with hSSC frequency,
CFU-F capacity and in vitro osteogenic potential. All correlations assessed by Spearman test. (H) Left: Frequency
of phenotypic hSSCs based on flow cytometric analysis in acute fracture callus hSSCs (n=407) and nonunion
hSSCs (n=20). Right: In vitro CFU-F potential of acute fracture (n=270) versus nonunion (n=18) derived hSSCs.
Data shown as mean + standard deviation of the mean (SEM). Significance assessed by Mann-Whitney test. (I)
UMAP plot of annotated cells clustered by Leiden found in single cell RNA-sequenced (10X Chromium)
nonunion tissue. Pie chart shows relative contribution of each cell populations to all cells captured. SSPCs:
Skeletal Stem and Progenitor Cells; FAPs: Fibro-Adipogenic Progenitors; CXCL12-RCs: CXCL12-expressing
Reticular Cells. Right: Dotplot of gene expression of osteochondrogenic skeletal stem and differentiation markers
in each Leiden cell population. (J) UMAP plot showing Leiden cluster specific gene expression in nonunion tissue.
(K) In vitro osteogenic readout of hSSCs also processed for SmartSeq2 single cell RNA-sequencing. (L) Left:
Representative immunohistological staining of Smooth muscle actin (aSMA) in freshly cultured hSSCs from a
healthy fracture (left) and Fibrous Dysplasia (right) tissue. Insets show in vitro osteogenic readouts of the same
cells. Right: Genes overexpressed in hSSCs in Fibrous Dysplasia compared to hSSCs from other source tissues.
(M) Gene ontology of phenotypes related to gene expression unique to Fibrous Dysplasia hSSCs. (N) Leiden
clustering of single hSSCs colored by patient group. (O) CytoTRACE analysis of single cell data inferring
developmental potential of hSSCs grouped by distinct source tissues. Fx: Fracture. Data shown as violin plots.
Statistical testing against ‘Young’ done by One-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posthoc test. (P) Matrixplot of gene
expression related to fibrogenic phenotypes in different hSSC groups. (Q) Left: UMAP of Leiden clustering of
single hSSCs. Right: UMAP colored by osteogenic readout. (R) Hierarchical clustering of donor-derived hSSCs.
(S) Abundance of donor hSSCs within functional group clusters. Right: Tracksplot of hSSC related markers as
found in fetal long bone hSSCs and their expression in functional subgroups of human adult fracture hSSCs. (T)
Selected GO Biological Processes in top250 genes of hSSCs of different functional states based on single cell
RNA-sequencing hSSC gene expression data. (U) Schematic overview of Boolean Equivalent Correlated Clusters
(BECC) algorithm approach performed on the global human dataset (GSE119087). Based on a seed gene (ACTA2)
the first step performs Boolean analysis by following the Boolean equivalent relationship three times. In the second
step a score is computed for each gene which are then ranked. Finally, a threshold is imposed using the StepMiner
algorithm to define a list of high-confidence genes with potentially superior performance than the seed gene (i.e.,
marking a fibrogenic/dysfunctional state). (V) UMAP plot of patient hSSCs with expression of TAGLN and MYL9.
(W) Gene expression in fetal hSSC subtypes. (X) Boolean relationships of selected genes based on the global
microarray dataset. (Y) Boolean relationships of TAGLN and MYL9 with bone marker genes in hSSCs from
nonunion fracture tissue, Fibrous Dysplasia and fetal bones as well as periosteal tissue. (Z) Top: Gene expression
of TAGLN and MYL9 in selected published datasets of healthy and pathological cells/tissues (GP Zones: Growth
Plate Zones; BMSC: Bone Marrow Stromal Cell; FS: Fibrosarcoma; LMS: Leiomyosarcoma; MFH: Malignant
Fibrous Histiocytoma; OS: Osteosarcoma). Bottom left: Gene expression of TAGLN and MYL9 in publicly
available GSE8406 dataset containing femoral trabecular bone extracted from healthy as well as osteoporotic (OP)
and osteoarthritic (OA) patients. Results are shown as log2 fold change of aged-matched healthy controls versus
diseased OP (n=9) or OA tissue (n=20). Dataset reports overall low fold changes with almost all data points
between -0.5 and 0.5, potentially reflecting the technical limitation in early microarray technology. Genes could be
confirmed by qPCR and showed higher fold changes. Bottom right: Gene expression of TAGLN and MYL9 in
GSE72815 dataset containing iliac crest bone biopsies (n=58) from healthy young (30.3 ± 5.4 years) and old
patients (73.1 ± 6.6 years) as well as old patients that underwent three weeks of estrogen (Es.) therapy (70.5 ± 5.2
years). Data shown as whisker boxplots with Tukey distribution. Significance assessed by one-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s post-hoc test.

Figure S6: Boolean based analysis of gene regulatory networks in single cells, Related to Figure 6.
A
B
C
F
G
D
E
H
I
J
MRFAP1
LIX1
RUNX1
CTGF
SFRP5
CADM2
DPEP1
NUPR1
CDH15
ZNF385B
LHX8
LUM
IL34
KCTD4
ITSN1
RRBP1
IBSP
KIF1A
ZNF474
TAGLN
MCOLN2
IL34_CDH15_IBSP_SFRP5
BSN
NOTCH3
ACTA2
NOTUM
DUSP2
COL9A1
MYL9
THY1
TINAGL1
MPZL2
LECT1
SLITRK6
CTSK
ISG15
LBP
CLDN5
GRB2
CDH5_KDR
PHOSPHO1
CCDC26
FGF7
COL1A2
TGFB3
ACRBP
RAPGEF4
TNXA
PRELP
COL3A1
CRYBA2
ANGPT1
DLK1
PCOLCE
ASPN
CLEC3A
KDR
CD86
WNT5A
MFAP2
BTC
CDH5
IGF2
POSTN
SERPINF1
FAM46B
FMOD
TNFRSF14
GLI3
LRP5
MYBPC2
B3GNT8
GLI2
COL6A3
DIP2C
CCN6
FERMT1
CTHRC1
MSLN
MDK
AGTR2
AGR2
BACE1
ACVRL1
FAM104A
COMP
IHH
COL1A1
BGN
COL11A1
FN1
MMP2
FBLN1
MMP13
RAC2
CXCL12
PRRX1
MATN3
HIST1H1E
PRSS23
PRRX2
ATF2
JUNB
FBXO7
RARRES2
RUNX2
SOX9
RIPK3
MXRA8
CD47
WNK4
CCN5
COL6A1
FTL
ACAN
SLIT3
SFRP2
CSF1R
CXCL14
PTN
EGFR
PAPD4
IL11RA
SFRP4
SMO
ACTA1
FBXO2
HECTD2
BMPR1B
COL2A1
CPEB1
IL7
PDGFRB
MYL4
EFHD1
BMPR1A
DCN
GRP
WIF1
ALPL
IGF1
Functional 
(Osteo./Chondro.)
Shared
Dysfunctional 
(Fibro./Stromal)
hi-hi
lo-lo
lo-hi
eqv
opo
hi-lo
Ligand
Receptor
Transcription
factor
Intracellular
signaling
Membranous/
Extracellular
S
ZSCAN31
POU4F2
NR4A1
NR4A2
RBAK
ZNF620
NR2F2
ENO1
TPI1
TFAP4
FOSB
ZNF575
DLX5
ZSCAN25
DLX6
ELF5
RPS10
ZNF286A
RPL35
ZNF286B
GATA3
ZNF853
JUN
JUNB
RXRA
ZNF658
NR4A3
ZNF658B
CEBPA
LHX1
MYF5
BACH2
MYF6
FOS
POU3F3 EGR1
PKM
TFCP2L1 ZNF629
EN2
ZNF572
ZNF773
SEMA4A
L
Graft excision
Imaging/staining
µCT
Patient hSSCs
+DMH1 & SAG
8 weeks
In vivo subQ transplant
SCENIC
M
N
R
O
qPCR: 48h Osteogenesis
P
Q
Control
DMH1 & SAG
DMH1 
SAG 
HNA
COL2
Patient hSSCs
Bi-cortical femoral fracture
+Factors
Fracture
Injury site
Patient hSSCs
TV (mm3)
0
10
20
30
40
50
Callus volume
HNA+COL2+
/section
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
p=0.0057
p=0.0034
HNA+/section
Day-10
Fracture
0%
0%
33%
67%
SAG
CD73
CD164
CD146
PDPN
no hSSCs
CD146
PDPN
hCP
hOP
hBCSP
hSSC
Stromal
7%
Osteo
0%
Fibro
10%
Chondro
83%
13%
21%
9%
57%
hSSCs only
0%
9%
27%
64%
DMH1
DMH1+SAG
Relative to Control
(GAPDH normalized)
Relative to Control
(GAPDH normalized)
BMPR1A
TAGLN
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2
IHH
SOX9
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2
K
PTCH1
GLI2
lo
hi
SMO
TGFBR1
TGFB3
MMP2
Functional hSSC enriched genes
Dysfunctional hSSC enriched genes
Figure S6. Boolean based analysis of gene regulatory networks in single cells, Related to Figure 6. (A)
BooleanNet statistic is used to evaluate Boolean implication relationships between two genes, A and B. aij is the
number of samples in the respective quadrants. nAlow and nBlow are number of samples where A and B is low
respectively. S00 = BooleanNet statistic and p00 = error rate to test sparsity for the bottom left quadrant. S > 3 and p
< 0.1 is used to test whether each quadrant is sparse. (B) Deriving six possible Boolean implication relationships
using BooleanNet statistics. (C) Schematic pipelines of Boolean analysis performed in this manuscript. (D)
Boolean Implication analysis was performed on the global human dataset (GSE119087) which was built from
25,955 human microarrays from diverse tissues (bulk samples). (E) Clustered Boolean Implication Network and
six possible Boolean Implication Relationships (BIRs) between genes/clusters. (F) Visualization of Boolean
Implication relationships by one-dimensional plots of gene expression levels assuming gene expression value
change (up or down) only once along a path. Samples are ordered in two possible ways to show the relationship. X
low => Y low can be represented in a single dimension in two possible ways: (1) X turns on first and then Y turns
on along a hypothetical biological path defined by the sample order. The path begins with X low and Y low, then it
transitions to X high and Y low, and finally it transitions to X high and Y high. (2) Y turns off first and then X
turns off along a hypothetical biological path defined by the sample order. The path begins with X high and Y
high, then it transitions to X high and Y low; finally, it transitions to both low. Similarly, the other Boolean
relationships follow two possible path scenarios based on logical conclusions. (G) Visualization of a complex
Boolean path using one-dimensional plot. (1) Three Boolean relationships between W, X, Y, and Z. (2) Graphic
representation of the Boolean relationships. Edges are colored differently according to the type of Boolean
relationship. (3) W turns off first and then X turns off along a hypothetical biological path defined by the sample
order followed by Y turning on and Z turning on. The path begins with W high, X high, Y low and Z low. (4) The
path begins with W low, X low, Y high and Z high. Z turns off first and then Y turns off along a hypothetical
biological path defined by the sample order followed by X turning on and W turning on. (H) Similar to panel E,
four Boolean implication relationships A equivalent B, B opposite C, C low => D low, D low => E low constitute
a Boolean path that can be used to develop a computational model of biological process from functional to
dysfunctional. The computational model predicts how these five genes might be changing along a biological path
as shown in the plot. (I) In the final step, selected paths from the Clustered BIN is used with BoolTraineR (BTR)
which incorporates the single-cell RNAseq dataset as an input, the Boolean value of genes in the beginning of the
selected pathway in MiDReG algorithm as an initial state, and the BIRs between genes as an initial Boolean
model. A gene regulatory network constructed underlying BTR for single-cell RNAseq dataset is generated. (J)
Complex Boolean implication network (BIN) derived from large database (GSE119087) of publicly available
human microarrays of human tissues for genes expressed in functional and dysfunctional hSSCs. Expression
relationships: hi-hi = A high => B high; hi-lo = A high => B low; lo-hi: A low => B high; lo-lo: A low => B low;
eqv. = equivalent; opo. = opposite. (K) Expression of Hedgehog pathway specific genes and TGFb pathway
specific genes in single cell RNA-sequencing data of functional and dysfunctional hSSCs. (L) Quantitative PCR of
primary hSSCs treated with factors or control for 48h in vitro. n=2 donors. (M) Schematic of in vivo subcutaneous
grafting of patient hSSCs. (N) Schematic of in vivo fracture site grafting of patient hSSCs. (O) Flow cytometric
readout of digested callus tissue using the hSSC lineage panel. (P) Micro-CT based callus volume quantification at
day-14 after fracture. (Q) Immunohistochemistry identifying hSSC-derived cells stained for HNA (Human Nuclear
antigen, red) and Collagen-2 (COL2, green) in fracture callus tissue of different experimental groups. (R)
Quantification of HNA and COL2 double-positive cells across calluses. One-way ANOVA with Dunnett's posthoc
test. (S) Prediction of enriched transcription factor networks using SCENIC based on single cell RNA-sequencing
data of patient hSSCs for comparison to Boolean method. Left: whole network. Right selected top 50 important
transcription factors and their interactions. Scale bar = 50µm.
