 The role of estrogen receptor-α and its activation function-1 for growth plate closure in female mice - PMC Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Log in Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Search… Search NCBI Primary site navigation Search Logged in as: Dashboard Publications Account settings Log in Search PMC Full-Text Archive Search in PMC Journal List User Guide PERMALINK Copy As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab . 2012 Mar 13;302(11):E1381–E1389. doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.00646.2011 Search in PMC Search in PubMed View in NLM Catalog Add to search The role of estrogen receptor-α and its activation function-1 for growth plate closure in female mice A E Börjesson A E Börjesson 1 Centre for Bone and Arthritis Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden; Find articles by A E Börjesson 1 , S H Windahl S H Windahl 1 Centre for Bone and Arthritis Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden; Find articles by S H Windahl 1 , E Karimian E Karimian 2 Division of Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Department of Woman's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; and Find articles by E Karimian 2 , E E Eriksson E E Eriksson 2 Division of Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Department of Woman's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; and Find articles by E E Eriksson 2 , M K Lagerquist M K Lagerquist 1 Centre for Bone and Arthritis Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden; Find articles by M K Lagerquist 1 , C Engdahl C Engdahl 1 Centre for Bone and Arthritis Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden; Find articles by C Engdahl 1 , M C Antal M C Antal 3 Departement of Functional Genomics, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale/UdS, Collège de France, Illkirch, Cedex, France Find articles by M C Antal 3 , A Krust A Krust 3 Departement of Functional Genomics, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale/UdS, Collège de France, Illkirch, Cedex, France Find articles by A Krust 3 , P Chambon P Chambon 3 Departement of Functional Genomics, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale/UdS, Collège de France, Illkirch, Cedex, France Find articles by P Chambon 3 , L Sävendahl L Sävendahl 2 Division of Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Department of Woman's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; and Find articles by L Sävendahl 2 , C Ohlsson C Ohlsson 1 Centre for Bone and Arthritis Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden; Find articles by C Ohlsson 1, ✉ Author information Article notes Copyright and License information 1 Centre for Bone and Arthritis Research, Institute of Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden; 2 Division of Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Department of Woman's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; and 3 Departement of Functional Genomics, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale/UdS, Collège de France, Illkirch, Cedex, France ✉ Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: C. Ohlsson, Centre for Bone and Arthritis Research, Klin Farm Lab, Vita Stråket 11, Dept. of Internal Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, Univ. of Gothenburg, SE-41345 Göteborg (e-mail: Claes.Ohlsson@medic.gu.se ). ✉ Corresponding author. Received 2011 Dec 19; Accepted 2012 Mar 9; Issue date 2012 Jun 1. Copyright © 2012 the American Physiological Society PMC Copyright notice PMCID: PMC3378067 PMID: 22414805 Abstract High estradiol levels in late puberty induce growth plate closure and thereby cessation of growth in humans. In mice, the growth plates do not fuse after sexual maturation, but old mice display reduced longitudinal bone growth and high-dose estradiol treatment induces growth plate closure. Estrogen receptor (ER)-α stimulates gene transcription via two activation functions (AFs), AF-1 and AF-2. To evaluate the role of ERα and its AF-1 for age-dependent reduction in longitudinal bone growth and growth plate closure, female mice with inactivation of ERα (ERα −/− ) or ERαAF-1 (ERαAF-1 0 ) were evaluated. Old (16- to 19-mo-old) female ERα −/− mice showed continued substantial longitudinal bone growth, resulting in longer bones (tibia: +8.3%, P < 0.01) associated with increased growth plate height (+18%, P < 0.05) compared with wild-type (WT) mice. In contrast, the longitudinal bone growth ceased in old ERαAF-1 0 mice (tibia: −4.9%, P < 0.01). Importantly, the proximal tibial growth plates were closed in all old ERαAF-1 0 mice while they were open in all WT mice. Growth plate closure was associated with a significantly altered balance between chondrocyte proliferation and apoptosis in the growth plate. In conclusion, old female ERα −/− mice display a prolonged and enhanced longitudinal bone growth associated with increased growth plate height, resembling the growth phenotype of patients with inactivating mutations in ERα or aromatase. In contrast, ERαAF-1 deletion results in a hyperactive ERα, altering the chondrocyte proliferation/apoptosis balance, leading to growth plate closure. This suggests that growth plate closure is induced by functions of ERα that do not require AF-1 and that ERαAF-1 opposes growth plate closure. Keywords: estrogen receptor-α, growth plate, estrogen, chondrocytes longitudinal bone growth occurs at the growth plate, which consists of three principal zones: the resting zone, the proliferative zone, and the hypertrophic zone ( 5 , 17 ). This growth process is called endochondral ossification, in which cartilage is formed and then replaced by bone tissue ( 2 ). High estradiol (E 2 ) levels in late puberty result in growth plate closure and thereby cessation of longitudinal bone growth in humans ( 14 ). The key role for estrogen in the regulation of longitudinal bone growth and growth plate closure in humans is demonstrated by the findings that both males and females with estrogen deficiency, caused by a mutation in the aromatase gene, continue to grow after sexual maturation because of unfused growth plates ( 14 , 29 , 32 ). A similar phenotype was seen in a patient with a point mutation in exon 2 of the estrogen receptor (ER)α (estrogen-resistant man). This man experienced a continued growth long into adulthood, but at the age of 33.5 yr his growth plates were nearly fused. This indicates that ERα is the main mediator of the estrogenic effects on growth plate closure in humans ( 30 , 31 ). It should be emphasized that the growth plate physiology differs between humans and rodents, since the growth plates do not fuse directly after sexual maturation in rodents and, therefore, one should be cautious when extrapolating data on humans from mouse models. However, old rodents have a reduced growth plate height, and long-term high-dose E 2 treatment results in growth plate closure in rodents ( 34 ). The mechanism for the estrogenic effect on growth plate fusion is not well understood, but, in a previous study of growth plate fusion in rabbits, it was demonstrated that estrogen accelerates growth plate fusion by advancing the senescence of the growth plate via proliferative exhaustion of the chondrocytes ( 36 ). ERα, ERβ, and the proposed ER G protein-coupled receptor GPR30 are expressed in the growth plate cartilage ( 8 , 18 , 22 , 24 , 25 , 33 , 37 ). ERα is the main functional ER in the growth plate, even though both ERβ and GPR30 have been suggested to have minor effects ( 22 , 35 , 37 , 38 ). We recently showed that local expression of ERα in the growth plate cartilage is required for a high-dose E 2 treatment to reduce the growth plate height in adult mice and for age-dependent reduction of longitudinal bone growth in old mice ( 2 ). These results emphasize the importance of local ERα expression in the growth plate. In vitro studies have shown that the E 2 -induced transactivation of ERα is mediated by its transcription activation function-1 (AF-1), AF-2, or both ( Fig. 1 ), and that this is dependent on the cell type and promoter context ( 33 , 35 , 37 ). There are two isoforms of ERα: the full-length 66-kDa ERα and the less abundant truncated, 46-kDa ERα lacking the NH 2 -terminal A/B domains ( Fig. 1 ). Fig. 1. Open in a new tab Schematic presentation of the estrogen receptor (ER)α proteins expressed in the different mouse models. There are two wild-type (WT) ERα isoforms: the full-length 66-kDa protein with start codon AUG1 and the truncated, less-abundant, 46-kDa protein with start codon AUG2. Mice with inactivation of ERα (ERα −/− ) do not express any ERα protein. Mice with a specific inactivation of the activation function (AF)-1 in ERα (ERαAF-1 0 ) have normal expression of a 49-kDa protein, lacking amino acids 2–148, with start codon AUG1 and also the normal 46-kDa isoform. The first-described ERKO mice from the group of Korach have low expression of a 61-kDa isoform, lacking amino acids 92–155, which are replaced by 7 amino acids from the Neomycin sequence (NEO), and also an expression of the normal 46-kDa isoform ( 9 , 11 , 16 ). Previous studies evaluating the role of ERα on longitudinal bone growth and growth plate closure have used an ERα knockout (KO) mouse model developed in the Korach and Smithies laboratories (ERKO mouse from the group of Korach). However, this mouse was later shown to have low expression of truncated ERα isoforms ( 9 , 11 , 16 ) ( Fig. 1 ). The incomplete ERKO mouse from the group of Korach showed a decrease in bone length and had closed growth plates in old female mice ( 7 , 26 ). These results are inconsistent with the estrogen-resistant man and aromatase-deficient patients who showed an increased bone length and unfused growth plates ( 29 – 31 ). We hypothesized that the conflicting growth plate phenotypes between mice and humans could be due to the remaining expression of truncated ERα isoforms in the ERKO mouse from the group of Korach. To clarify the role of ERα for longitudinal bone growth and growth plate closure, we, therefore, studied a mouse model with a complete inactivation of ERα (ERα −/− ) ( 12 ) until old age (16–19 mo old). We hypothesized that this mouse model might have a similar longitudinal bone growth and growth plate phenotype as the estrogen-resistant man. In addition, to clarify the role of the AF-1 in ERα for growth plate regulation, a mouse model with a specific inactivation of the AF-1 in ERα (ERαAF-1 0 ; Fig. 1 ) was evaluated. MATERIALS AND METHODS Generation of Mice The generation of ERα −/− mice has previously been described ( 12 ). These mice have a deletion in exon 3 of the ERα gene, and they do not express any of the isoforms of the ERα protein ( 12 ) ( Fig. 1 ). The ERα −/− mice and wild-type (WT) control (ERα +/+ ) littermates were inbred C57BL/6 mice and generated by breeding male ERα +/− with female ERα +/− mice. The generation of ERα AF-1-deficient (ERαAF-1 0 ) mice has previously been described ( 1 ). These mice have a deletion of 441 bp of exon 1, corresponding to amino acids 2–148, with a preserved translational initiation codon ( Fig. 1 ). The ERαAF-1 0 mice do not express any full-length 66-kDa protein. Instead, they have a normal expression of a truncated 49-kDa ERα protein that lacks AF-1 and also the physiologically occurring but less abundantly expressed 46-kDa ERα isoform, initiated by a second translational initiation codon ( 1 ) ( Fig. 1 ). The ERαAF-1 0 mice and WT control (ERαAF-1 +/+ ) littermates were inbred C57BL/6 mice and were generated by breeding male ERαAF-1 +/− with female ERαAF-1 +/− mice. In contrast to the ERα −/− mice used in the present study, the first-described ERKO mouse from the group of Korach is not completely devoid of an ERα protein ( 9 , 11 , 16 ). Analyses of this mouse have shown a low expression of some truncated ERα mRNAs. The two resulting proteins are the physiologically occurring 46-kDa ERα isoform and also low levels of a truncated 61-kDa isoform with a deletion of amino acids 92–155, which have been replaced by a 7-amino acid-long fragment from the Neomycin sequence ( 9 , 11 , 16 ) ( Fig. 1 ). Animal care was in accordance with institutional guidelines, and the study was approved by the local ethical committee. The following primer pairs were used for genotyping the mice: for genotyping the ERαAF-1 0 mice primer pair 1 was used: P1:1 (5′-TGAAAGAACATTGAACCCGACACAAT-3′) and P1:2 (5′-GCCTTCTACAGGTACCCGCGCCACAT-3′). Primer pairs 2 and 3 were used to genotype the ERα −/− mice: P2:1 (5′-TTGCCCGATAACAATAACAT-3′) and P2:2 (5′-ATTGTCTCTTTCTGACAC-3′); as well as P3:1 (5′-GGCATTACCATTCTCCTGGGAGTCT-3′) and P3:2 (5′-TCGCTTTCCTGAAGACCTTTCATAT-3′) ( 12 ). The mice were studied at different time points, including prepubertal mice (1 mo old), young adult mice (4 mo old), adult mice (8 mo old; only ERαAF-1 0 ), and old mice (16–19 mo old) ( n = 7–15). It should be emphasized that the growth plate physiology differs between humans and rodents, since the growth plates do not fuse directly after sexual maturation in rodents and, therefore, one should be cautious when extrapolating data on humans from mouse models. Measurements of Serum Hormone Levels Commercially available radioimmunoassay (RIA) kits were used to assess serum concentrations of insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I (double-antibody IGF-binding protein-blocked RIA; Mediagnost, Tubingen, Germany) and E 2 (Siemens Medical Solutions Diagnostics, Los Angeles, CA). Measurement of Bone Lengths Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry measurements of femur length were performed in 1-mo-old female mice using the Lunar PIXImus mouse densitometer (Wipro GE Healthcare, Madison, WI), Norland Medical Systems pDEXA Sabre (Norland Medical Systems, Fort Atkinson, WI), and the Sabre Research software (version 3.6; Norland Medical Systems). In the 4- and 16- to 19-mo-old mice, the femur and tibia were excised, and the bone lengths were measured with a micrometer. Quantitative Histology of Growth Plates Proximal tibiae and vertebrae were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, decalcified in 10% EDTA, and embedded in paraffin. Sections (5 μm thick) were stained with Alcian blue/van Gieson. Images were captured using a Nikon Eclipse E800 light microscope connected to a Hamamatsu digital camera C4742–95 and a computer. All histological measurements were performed in the central three-fourths of the growth plate sections using Olympus MicroImage software (version 4.0; Olympus Optical, Hamburg, Germany). The heights of the growth plate, the proliferative zone, and the hypertrophic zone were calculated as an average of 10–20 measurements/growth plate. The height of the terminal hypertrophic chondrocyte, the cell in the last intact lacuna, was measured in 10–20 different columns per growth plate and averaged. Immunostaining for Proliferating Cell Nuclear Antigen Immunohistochemistry was performed as previously described ( 25 ) with the following modifications. Antigen retrieval was carried out in citrate buffer (0.1 M) at +80°C in water bath for 1 h and then remained in the citrate buffer overnight cooling down to reach room temperature (RT), to prevent detachment of sections. Nonspecific antibody binding was blocked with 3% serum in PBS at RT for 45 min, and then the primary antibody for proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) (mouse monoclonal anti-PCNA, ab29; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) was added, and the sections were incubated for 1 h at RT. The sections were incubated with secondary antibody (biotinylated polyclonal rabbit anti-mouse, E0464; DakoCytomation) for 1 h at RT, and the signal was then enhanced with the avidin-biotin complex (ABC kit, PK-4001; Vectastain) and visualized by diaminobenzidine staining. Apoptosis Assay (Terminal Deoxynucleotidyl Transferase-Mediated Deoxy-UTP Nick End Labeling) Apoptotic cells in the growth plate sections were identified employing the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT)-mediated deoxy-UTP nick end-labeling (TUNEL) technique (TdT-FragELTM DNA fragmentation kit; Calbiochem, Damstadt, Germany), as described previously ( 6 ). RESULTS Old Female ERα −/− Mice Have Increased Bone Lengths While Old Female ERαAF-1 0 Mice Have Decreased Bone Lengths The growth of both the appendicular (femur and tibia) and axial (vertebra L 6 ) skeleton was followed in female ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice and compared with their respective WT controls. At the prepubertal age, both the female ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice had a normal size of the appendicular and axial skeleton ( Fig. 2 and data not shown). The female ERα −/− mice had normal longitudinal bone growth as young adults ( Figs. 2 and 3 A ). However, the old ERα −/− mice showed continued substantial longitudinal bone growth, resulting in clearly longer bones compared with WT controls (16–19 mo of age; tibia length: +8.3%, P < 0.01; femur length: +6.0%, P < 0.01; Figs. 2 and 3 B ). The axial skeletal growth (vertebral height of L 6 ; Fig. 4 A ) was normal in old female ERα −/− mice. Fig. 2. Open in a new tab Increased femur lengths in old ERα −/− mice while decreased femur lengths in old ERαAF-1 0 . Femur lengths of prepubertal (1-mo-old), young adult (4-mo-old), and old (16- to 19-mo-old) female ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice. * P < 0.05, Student's t -test vs. WT. Values are means ± SE ( n = 7–15). KO, knockout. Fig. 3. Open in a new tab Altered tibia lengths and growth plate heights in ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice. Tibia lengths of young adult (4-mo-old, A ) and old (16- to 19-mo-old, B ) female ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice. Growth plate heights (GPH) from proximal tibia of young adult ( C ) and old ( D ) female ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice. E : representative images of growth plates from proximal tibiae of old female ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice. * P < 0.05, Student's t -test vs. WT. Values are means ± SE ( n = 7–15). Fig. 4. Open in a new tab Decreased vertebral height in old ERαAF-1 0 mice. The vertebral heights ( A ) and the growth plate heights (GPH, B ) of the L 6 vertebrae in old (16- to 19-mo-old) female ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice. * P < 0.05, Student's t -test vs. WT. Values are means ± SE ( n = 7–15). After sexual maturation, the young adult ERαAF-1 0 mice showed a slight decrease in both femoral and tibial lengths compared with their WT controls ( P < 0.05; Figs. 2 and 3 A ). The length difference between the ERαAF-1 0 and WT mice increased with age and was substantial in the old mice (16–19 mo of age, femur length: −4.0%, tibia length: −4.9%, P < 0.01; Figs. 2 and 3 B ). The height of the L 6 vertebra was also reduced in the old ERαAF-1 0 mice (L 6 : −6.1%, P < 0.01; Fig. 4 A ). The length differences seen in the old female ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice were not associated with any changes in serum IGF-I levels ( Table 1 ). However, the serum E 2 levels were elevated in both the old female ERα −/− (+724 ± 224%, P < 0.05) and ERαAF-1 0 (+119 ± 28%, P < 0.05) mice compared with WT controls, due to disturbed negative feedback regulation. Table 1. Body weight and IGF-I serum levels in ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice Prepubertal Young Adult Old ERα −/− ERαAF-1 0 ERα −/− ERαAF-1 0 ERα −/− ERαAF-1 0 WT KO WT KO WT KO WT KO WT KO WT KO Body wt, g 15.9 ± 0.5 16.2 ± 0.6 15.4 ± 0.3 15.8 ± 0.3 21.1 ± 0.5 22.3 ± 0.8 22.1 ± 0.5 24.7 ± 1.0 * 33.4 ± 2.4 46.2 ± 4.8 * 28.9 ± 1.0 31.5 ± 1.6 IGF-I, ng/ml ND ND ND ND 223 ± 11 188 ± 23 266 ± 10 272 ± 14 385 ± 41 388 ± 25 421 ± 24 420 ± 15 Open in a new tab Values are given as means ± SE; n = 7–15 mice in each group. IGF-I, insulin-like growth factor-I; ERα −/− , mice with inactivation of estrogen receptor-α (ERα); ERαAF-1 0 , mice with a specific inactivation of the activation function-1 in ERα; prepubertal, 1-mo-old mice; young adult, 4-mo-old mice; old, 16- to 19-mo-old mice; WT, wild type; KO, knockout. * P < 0.05 vs. WT. ND, not determined. Increased Growth Plate Height in Old ERα −/− Mice but Growth Plate Closure in Old ERαAF-1 0 Mice There was no change in the proximal tibial growth plate height in the young adult female ERα −/− mice, whereas the old ERα −/− mice had an increased growth plate height (+18%, P < 0.05) compared with the WT controls ( Fig. 3 , C-E ). In contrast, the growth plate height was slightly reduced in the young adult ERαAF-1 0 mice, and in the old (16–19 mo of age) ERαAF-1 0 mice the proximal tibial growth plates were closed ( Fig. 3 , C–E ). Further evaluation of the timing of the growth plate closure showed an initiation of growth plate closure in adult (8-mo-old) female ERαAF-1 0 mice (1/9 was completely closed, 3/9 were half-closed, and 5/9 were open). In contrast, all adult and old female WT controls had open growth plates in the long bones. Thus, the growth plate heights in the proximal tibia corresponded well with the longitudinal bone growth phenotypes observed in the old female ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice. Both the female ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice had normal vertebral growth plate heights at an old age ( Fig. 4 B ). The Growth Plate Closure in Female ERαAF-1 0 Mice is Associated With an Altered Balance Between Proliferation and Apoptosis The growth plate morphology was further analyzed to characterize the mechanisms behind the enhanced longitudinal bone growth in old female ERα −/− mice and the growth plate closure observed in the old ERαAF-1 0 mice. In the old ERα −/− mice, which have an increased growth plate height ( Fig. 3 , D and E ), there was a nonsignificant tendency of increases in height of both the proliferative and hypertrophic zones compared with WT controls ( Fig. 5 , A and B ). The proliferative zone was slightly decreased in the young adult ERαAF-1 0 mice compared with WT controls. This decrease became more pronounced in the adult mice, and, finally, the growth plates were closed in the old ERαAF-1 0 mice ( Fig. 5 A ). The height of the terminal hypertrophic chondrocytes was not altered in the ERα −/− or ERαAF-1 0 mice ( Fig. 5 C ). Fig. 5. Open in a new tab Decreased proliferative zone in the ERαAF-1 0 mice. Heights of the proliferative zone ( A ), hypertrophic zone ( B ), and terminal hypertrophic chondrocyte ( C ) of the proximal tibial growth plates in young adult (4-mo-old), adult (8-mo-old), and old (16- to 19-mo-old ) female ERα −/− and ERαAF-1 0 mice. * P < 0.05, Student's t -test vs. WT. Values are means ± SE ( n = 7–15). Immunostaining for PCNA and TUNEL was performed to evaluate proliferation and apoptosis, respectively. Neither the numbers of PCNA-positive nor TUNEL-positive cells were significantly altered in the ERα −/− mice compared with WT controls ( Fig. 6 A ). Interestingly, there was an altered balance between proliferation and apoptosis in the proximal tibial growth plate in young adult (4-mo-old) female ERαAF-1 0 mice ( P < 0.05, Fig. 6 B ). The altered balance is the result of a combination of nonsignificant tendencies of reduced proliferation (−51%, P = 0.08) and increased apoptosis (+77%, P = 0.12) in the ERαAF-1 0 mice compared with WT controls ( Fig. 6 B ). Fig. 6. Open in a new tab Altered balance between apoptosis and proliferation in ERαAF-1 0 mice. Immunostaining for proliferation [proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)] and apoptosis [terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxy-UTP nick end-labeling (TUNEL)] in the proximal tibial growth plates of young adult (4-mo-old) ERα −/− ( A ) and ERαAF-1 0 ( B ) mice. The values are expressed as percent of WT mice, and the value of the WT mice is set to 100%. Immunostaining of the growth plates shows that the growth plate closure in the ERαAF-1 0 mice is associated with an altered balance between apoptosis and proliferation ( P < 0.05). Values are means ± SE ( n = 7–15). DISCUSSION In humans, estrogens induce growth plate fusion after sexual maturation as a result of the prolonged exposure to increased serum E 2 levels ( 21 , 28 ). The timing of growth plate fusion can be manipulated by different pharmacological treatments, which all alter the timing of the peak of estrogenic activity ( 2 , 13 , 21 , 27 , 28 ). It should be emphasized that the growth plate physiology differs between humans and rodents, since the growth plates do not fuse directly after sexual maturation in rodents and, therefore, one should be cautious when extrapolating data on humans from mouse models, but old mice have a reduced growth plate height, and it is clear that growth plate closure can be reached by supraphysiological E 2 treatment ( 34 ). There has thus far been a substantial discrepancy between the longitudinal bone growth phenotype observed in the previously evaluated ERKO mouse from the group of Korach and the phenotype in the estrogen-resistant man and aromatase-deficient patients ( 7 , 26 ), and we hypothesized that this could be due to the remaining expression of the truncated ERα isoforms in the ERKO mouse from the group of Korach ( 9 , 11 ). We herein show that mice with complete inactivation of ERα (ERα −/− ) have a similar growth plate phenotype as the estrogen-resistant man, showing continued substantial longitudinal bone growth, associated with wide growth plates at an old age. In addition, we demonstrate that mice specifically devoid of AF-1 in ERα display growth plate closure and, therefore, the ERαAF-1 0 mouse model might be a useful animal model for studying mechanistic aspects of growth plate closure. ERα is Required for a Normal Age-Dependent Reduction of Longitudinal Bone Growth Low E 2 levels enhance skeletal growth during early sexual maturation (i.e., the pubertal growth spurt), whereas high E 2 levels during late puberty result in growth plate fusion and thereby cessation of longitudinal bone growth in humans and reduced longitudinal bone growth in rodents ( 4 , 5 , 10 , 14 ). The mechanisms of action for these two seemingly opposite effects of estrogens on longitudinal bone growth are not fully understood but clearly depend on maturational stage and serum levels of E 2 ( 2 , 4 , 10 , 14 ). E 2 treatment is used to induce growth plate fusion in aromatase-deficient patients, and it has been shown that growth plate fusion only occurs when the E 2 serum levels are above a certain E 2 “threshold” ( 15 , 19 ). This finding indicates that growth plate fusion is initiated when a certain E 2 threshold is reached during the pubertal development. The estrogen-resistant man did not respond to E 2 treatment, but at the age of 33.5 yr his growth plates were nearly fused. This suggests that it is possible to attain growth plate closure even without a functional ERα in humans, but that this fusion is clearly delayed ( 31 ). There seems to be species differences regarding ERα-independent growth plate fusion, since elderly female ERα −/− mice still have open growth plates. Effects of estrogen on the growth spurt during early sexual maturation. We have previously demonstrated that male mice with complete ERα inactivation, with no remaining truncated ERα transcripts, display reduced longitudinal bone growth during sexual maturation associated with reduced serum IGF-I levels ( 2 ). The low IGF-I levels in these mice are in accordance with the impaired growth hormone (GH) secretion and low IGF-I levels in male aromatase-deficient patients ( 19 ). In contrast, the female mice with complete ERα inactivation were, in the present study, shown to have a normal longitudinal bone growth during sexual maturation and normal serum IGF-I levels. These findings indicate that ERα via altered activity in the GH/IGF-I axis is of importance for the pubertal growth spurt in male but not female mice. Effects of high estrogen levels to reduce growth after sexual maturation. When studying old female ERα −/− mice, we could, for the first time, show that the bone length and growth plate phenotypes in these mice correspond well with those found in postpubertal patients with aromatase deficiency or a nonfunctional ERα ( 29 – 31 ). Accordingly, the old female ERα −/− mice show increased bone lengths as a result of substantial continued longitudinal bone growth associated with wider growth plates. The ERα −/− mice have increased E 2 levels due to disturbed negative feedback regulation. These high E 2 levels could have led to reduced growth plate height in normal WT mice, but in the ERα −/− mice these high E 2 levels are probably not enough to alone mediate a reduction of growth plate height, since the ERα −/− mice have wider growth plates. Therefore, the timing of growth plate closure seems to be dependent on a functional ERα, although the mechanisms within the growth plate for these ERα-mediated estrogenic effects are unknown. We have previously shown that old female mice with a cartilage-specific ERα inactivation also have an increased bone length, emphasizing that local ERα is of importance for age-dependent reduction of longitudinal bone growth ( 2 ). Our present study together with these previous human and mouse studies strongly suggest that ERα is the dominant ER for the normal age-dependent reduction and cessation of longitudinal bone growth observed in mouse and humans, respectively, and that this effect is mediated via growth plate-located ERα ( 2 , 30 , 31 ). Growth Plate Closure in ERαAF-1 0 Mice The young adult but not the prepubertal female ERαAF-1 0 mice show decreased length of the long bones associated with decreased growth plate height, suggesting that ERα AF-1 is crucial for a normal longitudinal bone growth during sexual maturation. Importantly, in the old (16- to 19-mo-old) female ERαAF-1 0 mice, the lengths of the long bones are severely reduced, and the growth plates in the proximal tibiae are closed. Further evaluation of the timing of the growth plate closure revealed that the adult (8-mo-old) ERαAF-1 0 mice were in the process of closing their growth plates. Before growth plate closure had occurred, the height of the proliferative chondrocyte zone of the growth plate was reduced, and the mechanism for growth plate closure in the ERαAF-1 0 mice seems to involve a reduction in chondrocyte proliferation and an increase in chondrocyte apoptosis, reflected by a significantly altered balance between chondrocyte apoptosis and proliferation. In a previous study of growth plate fusion in rabbits, it was demonstrated that estrogen accelerates growth plate fusion by advancing the senescence of the growth plate via proliferative exhaustion of the chondrocytes ( 36 ). Our present finding is in line with this previous study in rabbits in that the ERα AF-1-deficient mice show growth plate closure that is associated with a disturbed balance between proliferation and apoptosis of the chondrocytes. The molecular mechanism by which estrogen may accelerate growth plate fusion is not well understood, but it is likely that the estrogenic effect is mediated via ERα. Old ERαAF-1 0 but not WT mice had fused growth plates, indicating an acceleration of the growth plate senescence in the absence of AF-1. In contrast, mice with a complete ERα inactivation displayed wider growth plates, suggesting that they have a reduced senescence of the growth plate. There are several transcriptional cofactors that bind to ERα AF-1 and ERα AF-2; these cofactors are critical determinants of the ability of ERα to regulate gene transcription ( 23 ). It is possible that there are cofactors specific for ERα AF-1 that have repressive effects on the ERα-mediated growth plate senescence pathway. When AF-1 is deleted, these cofactors are unable to bind to ERα and the lack of cofactor binding could lead to the result that the repressive effect of AF-1 on the growth plate senescence is lost. The AF-1-deficient ERα could then become hyperactive, via the ERα AF-2; induce growth plate fusion; and thereby cause cessation of longitudinal bone growth. However, in the ERαAF-1 0 mice, the E 2 levels are, due to disturbed negative feedback regulation, elevated, and this could lead to that the threshold level for estrogen-induced growth plate closure is reached and that the AF-1-truncated ERα might have retained the capacity to mediate growth plate closure induced by these supraphysiological E 2 levels. Our results indicate that the ERαAF-1 0 mice could be used as models for studying E 2 -mediated growth plate closure. These results also suggest that it would be interesting to study if some patients with short stature have an inactivating mutation in the AF-1 region in ERα, which could have led to a hyperactive ERα causing premature growth plate closure and thereby reduced final height. A role for ERα for the normal variation in human height is strongly supported by our recent findings using large-scale meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies clearly establishing the ERα locus to be involved in the regulation of adult height ( 20 ). Growth plate closure in appendicular and axial skeleton seems to be regulated in different manners, and our data suggest that the growth plates in the appendicular skeleton fuse faster and are more affected by high E 2 levels than the growth plates in the axial skeleton. This has also been shown in girls subjected to estrogen therapy, to prevent them from being extremely tall, where the leg growth is almost completely stopped while the growth of the trunk is reduced to a lesser extent ( 3 ). Proposed Role for ERα in the Regulation of Growth Plate Closure in Mice and Humans Our results are summarized in Fig. 7 . Inactivation of ERα with no remaining ERα protein results in prolonged and enhanced longitudinal bone growth associated with wider growth plates in both mice and humans ( Fig. 7 A ). In mice, a normal ERα activation results in an age-dependent reduced growth plate height and longitudinal bone growth ( Fig. 7 B ), whereas, in humans, a physiological elevation of ERα activation during late puberty results in growth plate closure and thereby cessation of longitudinal bone growth ( Fig. 7 C ). In mice, growth plate closure only occurs in mice with specific inactivation of AF-1 in ERα ( Fig. 7 D ), resulting in a hyperactive ERα in the growth plate. This hyperactivation of ERα in growth plate cartilage could be a direct effect of the deletion of the AF-1 and/or an indirect effect as a result of the elevated E 2 levels in the ERαAF-1 0 mice ( Fig. 7 D ). Fig. 7. Open in a new tab Proposed role for ERα in the regulation of growth plate closure in mice and humans. Inactivation of ERα with no remaining ERα protein results in prolonged and enhanced longitudinal bone growth associated with wider growth plates in both mice and humans ( A ). In mice, a normal ERα activation results in an age-dependent reduced growth plate height and longitudinal bone growth ( B ), whereas, in humans, a physiological elevation of ERα activation during late puberty results in growth plate closure and thereby cessation of longitudinal bone growth ( C ). In mice, growth plate closure only occurs in mice with specific inactivation of AF-1 in ERα ( D ), resulting in a hyperactive ERα in the growth plate. This hyperactivation of ERα in growth plate cartilage could be a direct effect of the deletion of the AF-1 and/or an indirect effect as a result of the elevated estradiol levels in the ERαAF-1 0 mice ( D ). We conclude that the prolonged substantial longitudinal bone growth observed in elderly ERα −/− mice resembles the continued postpubertal growth seen in humans with ERα inactivation or aromatase deficiency. In contrast, specific inactivation of ERα AF-1 results in a hyperactive ERα, altering the balance between chondrocyte proliferation and apoptosis in the growth plate, leading to growth plate closure. Therefore, this study suggests that 1 ) growth plate closure is induced by functions of the ERα that do not require AF-1 and 2 ) ERα AF-1 opposes growth plate closure. GRANTS This study was supported by the Swedish Research Council, COMBINE, an ALF/LUA research grant in Göteborg, the Lundberg Foundation, the Lundberg Foundation, the Torsten and Ragnar Söderberg's Foundation, the Novo Nordisk Foundation, the King Gustav V's 80 Years' Foundation, the association against Rheumatism, the Åke Wiberg Foundation, and National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases Grant DK-071122. DISCLOSURES All the authors state that they have no conflicts of interest. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Author contributions: A.E.B. and C.O. conception and design of research; A.E.B., S.H.W., E.K., E.E., M.K.L., C.E., M.C.A., and A.K. performed experiments; A.E.B., S.H.W., E.K., E.E., M.K.L., C.E., P.C., L.S., and C.O. analyzed data; A.E.B., L.S., and C.O. interpreted results of experiments; A.E.B. and C.O. prepared figures; A.E.B., L.S., and C.O. drafted manuscript; A.E.B. and C.O. edited and revised manuscript; A.E.B., S.H.W., E.K., E.E., M.K.L., C.E., M.C.A., A.K., P.C., L.S., and C.O. approved final version of manuscript. REFERENCES 1. Billon-Gales A, Fontaine C, Filipe C, Douin-Echinard V, Fouque MJ, Flouriot G, Gourdy P, Lenfant F, Laurell H, Krust A, Chambon P, Arnal JF. The transactivating function 1 of estrogen receptor alpha is dispensable for the vasculoprotective actions of 17beta-estradiol. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106: 2053–2058, 2009 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 2. Börjesson AE, Lagerquist MK, Liu C, Shao R, Windahl SH, Karlsson C, Sjögren K, Moverare-Skrtic S, Antal MC, Krust A, Mohan S, Chambon P, Sävendahl L, Ohlsson C. The role of estrogen receptor alpha in growth plate cartilage for longitudinal bone growth. J Bone Miner Res 25: 2414–2424, 2010 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 3. Brinkers JM, Lamore PJ, Gevers EF, Boersma B, Wit JM. The effect of oestrogen treatment on body proportions in constitutionally tall girls. Eur J Pediatr 153: 237–240, 1994 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 4. Caruso-Nicoletti M, Cassorla F, Skerda M, Ross JL, Loriaux DL, Cutler GB., Jr Short term, low dose estradiol accelerates ulnar growth in boys. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 61: 896–898, 1985 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 5. Chagin AS, Chrysis D, Takigawa M, Ritzen EM, Savendahl L. Locally produced estrogen promotes fetal rat metatarsal bone growth; an effect mediated through increased chondrocyte proliferation and decreased apoptosis. J Endocrinol 188: 193–203, 2006 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 6. Chagin AS, Karimian E, Zaman F, Takigawa M, Chrysis D, Savendahl L. Tamoxifen induces permanent growth arrest through selective induction of apoptosis in growth plate chondrocytes in cultured rat metatarsal bones. Bone 40: 1415–1424, 2007 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 7. Chagin AS, Lindberg MK, Andersson N, Moverare S, Gustafsson JA, Savendahl L, Ohlsson C. Estrogen receptor-beta inhibits skeletal growth and has the capacity to mediate growth plate fusion in female mice. J Bone Miner Res 19: 72–77, 2004 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 8. Chagin AS, Savendahl L. GPR30 estrogen receptor expression in the growth plate declines as puberty progresses. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92: 4873–4877, 2007 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 9. Couse JF, Curtis SW, Washburn TF, Lindzey J, Golding TS, Lubahn DB, Smithies O, Korach KS. Analysis of transcription and estrogen insensitivity in the female mouse after targeted disruption of the estrogen receptor gene. Mol Endocrinol 9: 1441–1454, 1995 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 10. Cutler GB., Jr The role of estrogen in bone growth and maturation during childhood and adolescence. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 61: 141–144, 1997 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 11. Denger S, Reid G, Kos M, Flouriot G, Parsch D, Brand H, Korach KS, Sonntag-Buck V, Gannon F. ERalpha gene expression in human primary osteoblasts: evidence for the expression of two receptor proteins. Mol Endocrinol 15: 2064–2077, 2001 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 12. Dupont S, Krust A, Gansmuller A, Dierich A, Chambon P, Mark M. Effect of single and compound knockouts of estrogen receptors alpha (ERalpha) and beta (ERbeta) on mouse reproductive phenotypes. Development 127: 4277–4291, 2000 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 13. Feuillan P, Merke D, Leschek EW, Cutler GB., Jr Use of aromatase inhibitors in precocious puberty. Endocr Relat Cancer 6: 303–306, 1999 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 14. Juul A. The effects of oestrogens on linear bone growth. Hum Reprod Update 7: 303–313, 2001 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 15. Khosla S. Estrogen and bone: insights from estrogen-resistant, aromatase-deficient, and normal men. Bone 43: 414–417, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 16. Kos M, Denger S, Reid G, Korach KS, Gannon F. Down but not out? A novel protein isoform of the estrogen receptor alpha is expressed in the estrogen receptor alpha knockout mouse. J Mol Endocrinol 29: 281–286, 2002 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 17. Kronenberg HM. Developmental regulation of the growth plate. Nature 423: 332–336, 2003 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 18. Kusec V, Virdi AS, Prince R, Triffitt JT. Localization of estrogen receptor-alpha in human and rabbit skeletal tissues. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 83: 2421–2428, 1998 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 19. Lanfranco F, Zirilli L, Baldi M, Pignatti E, Corneli G, Ghigo E, Aimaretti G, Carani C, Rochira V. A novel mutation in the human aromatase gene: insights on the relationship among serum estradiol, longitudinal growth and bone mineral density in an adult man under estrogen replacement treatment. Bone 43: 628–635, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 20. Lango AH, Estrada K, Lettre G, Berndt SI, Weedon MN, Rivadeneira F, Willer CJ, Jackson AU, Vedantam S, Raychaudhuri S, Ferreira T, Wood AR, Weyant RJ, Segre AV, Speliotes EK, Wheeler E, Soranzo N, Park JH, Yang J, Gudbjartsson D, Heard-Costa NL, Randall JC, Qi L, Vernon Smith A, Magi R, Pastinen T, Liang L, Heid IM, Luan J, Thorleifsson G, Winkler TW, Goddard ME, Sin Lo K, Palmer C, Workalemahu T, Aulchenko YS, Johansson A, Zillikens MC, Feitosa MF, Esko T, Johnson T, Ketkar S, Kraft P, Mangino M, Prokopenko I, Absher D, Albrecht E, Ernst F, Glazer NL, Hayward C, Hottenga JJ, Jacobs KB, Knowles JW, Kutalik Z, Monda KL, Polasek O, Preuss M, Rayner NW, Robertson NR, Steinthorsdottir V, Tyrer JP, Voight BF, Wiklund F, Xu J, Zhao JH, Nyholt DR, Pellikka N, Perola M, Perry JR, Surakka I, Tammesoo ML, Altmaier EL, Amin N, Aspelund T, Bhangale T, Boucher G, Chasman DI, Chen C, Coin L, Cooper MN, Dixon AL, Gibson Q, Grundberg E, Hao K, Juhani Junttila M, Kaplan LM, Kettunen J, Konig IR, Kwan T, Lawrence RW, Levinson DF, Lorentzon M, McKnight B, Morris AP, Muller M, Suh Ngwa J, Purcell S, Rafelt S, Salem RM, Salvi E, Sanna S, Shi J, Sovio U, Thompson JR, Turchin MC, Vandenput L, Verlaan DJ, Vitart V, White CC, Ziegler A, Almgren P, Balmforth AJ, Campbell H, Citterio L, De Grandi A, Dominiczak A, Duan J, Elliott P, Elosua R, Eriksson JG, Freimer NB, Geus EJ, Glorioso N, Haiqing S, Hartikainen AL, Havulinna AS, Hicks AA, Hui J, Igl W, Illig T, Jula A, Kajantie E, Kilpelainen TO, Koiranen M, Kolcic I, Koskinen S, Kovacs P, Laitinen J, Liu J, Lokki ML, Marusic A, Maschio A, Meitinger T, Mulas A, Pare G, Parker AN, Peden JF, Petersmann A, Pichler I, Pietilainen KH, Pouta A, Ridderstrale M, Rotter JI, Sambrook JG, Sanders AR, Schmidt CO, Sinisalo J, Smit JH, Stringham HM, Bragi Walters G, Widen E, Wild SH, Willemsen G, Zagato L, Zgaga L, Zitting P, Alavere H, Farrall M, McArdle WL, Nelis M, Peters MJ, Ripatti S, van Meurs JB, Aben KK, Ardlie KG, Beckmann JS, Beilby JP, Bergman RN, Bergmann S, Collins FS, Cusi D, den Heijer M, Eiriksdottir G, Gejman PV, Hall AS, Hamsten A, Huikuri HV, Iribarren C, Kahonen M, Kaprio J, Kathiresan S, Kiemeney L, Kocher T, Launer LJ, Lehtimaki T, Melander O, Mosley TH, Jr, Musk AW, Nieminen MS, O'Donnell CJ, Ohlsson C, Oostra B, Palmer LJ, Raitakari O, Ridker PM, Rioux JD, Rissanen A, Rivolta C, Schunkert H, Shuldiner AR, Siscovick DS, Stumvoll M, Tonjes A, Tuomilehto J, van Ommen GJ, Viikari J, Heath AC, Martin NG, Montgomery GW, Province MA, Kayser M, Arnold AM, Atwood LD, Boerwinkle E, Chanock SJ, Deloukas P, Gieger C, Gronberg H, Hall P, Hattersley AT, Hengstenberg C, Hoffman W, Lathrop GM, Salomaa V, Schreiber S, Uda M, Waterworth D, Wright AF, Assimes TL, Barroso I, Hofman A, Mohlke KL, Boomsma DI, Caulfield MJ, Cupples LA, Erdmann J, Fox CS, Gudnason V, Gyllensten U, Harris TB, Hayes RB, Jarvelin MR, Mooser V, Munroe PB, Ouwehand WH, Penninx BW, Pramstaller PP, Quertermous T, Rudan I, Samani NJ, Spector TD, Volzke H, Watkins H, Wilson JF, Groop LC, Haritunians T, Hu FB, Kaplan RC, Metspalu A, North KE, Schlessinger D, Wareham NJ, Hunter DJ, O'Connell JR, Strachan DP, Wichmann HE, Borecki IB, van Duijn CM, Schadt EE, Thorsteinsdottir U, Peltonen L, Uitterlinden AG, Visscher PM, Chatterjee N, Loos RJ, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI, Ingelsson E, Lindgren CM, Abecasis GR, Stefansson K, Frayling TM, Hirschhorn JN. Hundreds of variants clustered in genomic loci and biological pathways affect human height. Nature 467: 832–838, 2010 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 21. MacGillivray MH, Morishima A, Conte F, Grumbach M, Smith EP. Pediatric endocrinology update: an overview. The essential roles of estrogens in pubertal growth, epiphyseal fusion and bone turnover: lessons from mutations in the genes for aromatase and the estrogen receptor. Horm Res 49, Suppl 1: 2–8, 1998 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 22. Martensson UE, Salehi SA, Windahl S, Gomez MF, Sward K, Daszkiewicz-Nilsson J, Wendt A, Andersson N, Hellstrand P, Grande PO, Owman C, Rosen CJ, Adamo ML, Lundquist I, Rorsman P, Nilsson BO, Ohlsson C, Olde B, Leeb-Lundberg LM. Deletion of the G protein-coupled receptor 30 impairs glucose tolerance, reduces bone growth, increases blood pressure, and eliminates estradiol-stimulated insulin release in female mice. Endocrinology 150: 687–698, 2009 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 23. McKenna NJ, Lanz RB, O'Malley BW. Nuclear receptor coregulators: cellular and molecular biology. Endocr Rev 20: 321–344, 1999 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 24. Nilsson LO, Boman A, Savendahl L, Grigelioniene G, Ohlsson C, Ritzen EM, Wroblewski J. Demonstration of estrogen receptor-beta immunoreactivity in human growth plate cartilage. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 84: 370–373, 1999 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 25. Nilsson O, Chrysis D, Pajulo O, Boman A, Holst M, Rubinstein J, Martin Ritzen E, Savendahl L. Localization of estrogen receptors-alpha and -beta and androgen receptor in the human growth plate at different pubertal stages. J Endocrinol 177: 319–326, 2003 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 26. Parikka V, Peng Z, Hentunen T, Risteli J, Elo T, Vaananen HK, Harkonen P. Estrogen responsiveness of bone formation in vitro and altered bone phenotype in aged estrogen receptor-alpha-deficient male and female mice. Eur J Endocrinol 152: 301–314, 2005 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 27. Partsch CJ, Sippell WG. Pathogenesis and epidemiology of precocious puberty. Effects of exogenous oestrogens. Hum Reprod Update 7: 292–302, 2001 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 28. Ritzen EM, Nilsson O, Grigelioniene G, Holst M, Savendahl L, Wroblewski J. Estrogens and human growth. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 74: 383–386, 2000 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 29. Rochira V, Carani C. Aromatase deficiency in men: a clinical perspective. Nat Rev Endocrinol 5: 559–568, 2009 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 30. Smith EP, Boyd J, Frank GR, Takahashi H, Cohen RM, Specker B, Williams TC, Lubahn DB, Korach KS. Estrogen resistance caused by a mutation in the estrogen-receptor gene in a man. N Engl J Med 331: 1056–1061, 1994 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 31. Smith EP, Specker B, Bachrach BE, Kimbro KS, Li XJ, Young MF, Fedarko NS, Abuzzahab MJ, Frank GR, Cohen RM, Lubahn DB, Korach KS. Impact on bone of an estrogen receptor-alpha gene loss of function mutation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 93: 3088–3096, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 32. Vandenput L, Ohlsson C. Estrogens as regulators of bone health in men. Nat Rev Endocrinol 5: 437–443, 2009 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 33. van der Eerden BC, Karperien M, Wit JM. Systemic and local regulation of the growth plate. Endocr Rev 24: 782–801, 2003 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 34. Vanderschueren D, Boonen S, Ederveen AG, de Coster R, Van Herck E, Moermans K, Vandenput L, Verstuyf A, Bouillon R. Skeletal effects of estrogen deficiency as induced by an aromatase inhibitor in an aged male rat model. Bone 27: 611–617, 2000 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 35. Vidal O, Lindberg MK, Hollberg K, Baylink DJ, Andersson G, Lubahn DB, Mohan S, Gustafsson JA, Ohlsson C. Estrogen receptor specificity in the regulation of skeletal growth and maturation in male mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97: 5474–5479, 2000 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 36. Weise M, De-Levi S, Barnes KM, Gafni RI, Abad V, Baron J. Effects of estrogen on growth plate senescence and epiphyseal fusion. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98: 6871–6876, 2001 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 37. Windahl SH, Andersson N, Chagin AS, Martensson UE, Carlsten H, Olde B, Swanson C, Moverare-Skrtic S, Savendahl L, Lagerquist MK, Leeb-Lundberg LM, Ohlsson C. The role of the G protein-coupled receptor GPR30 in the effects of estrogen in ovariectomized mice. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 296: E490–E496, 2009 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 38. Windahl SH, Vidal O, Andersson G, Gustafsson JA, Ohlsson C. Increased cortical bone mineral content but unchanged trabecular bone mineral density in female ERbeta(-/-) mice. J Clin Invest 104: 895–901, 1999 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Articles from American Journal of Physiology - Endocrinology and Metabolism are provided here courtesy of American Physiological Society ACTIONS View on publisher site Cite Collections Permalink PERMALINK Copy RESOURCES Similar articles Cited by other articles Links to NCBI Databases Cite Copy Download .nbib .nbib Format: AMA APA MLA NLM Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection * Choose a collection Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Follow NCBI NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) NCBI on Facebook NCBI on LinkedIn NCBI on GitHub NCBI RSS feed Connect with NLM NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) NLM on Facebook NLM on YouTube National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Help Accessibility Careers NLM NIH HHS USA.gov Back to Top 