 Hindlimb heating increases vascular access of large molecules to murine tibial growth plates measured by in vivo multiphoton imaging - PMC Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( Lock Locked padlock icon ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Search Log in Dashboard Publications Account settings Log out Search… Search NCBI Primary site navigation Search Logged in as: Dashboard Publications Account settings Log in Search PMC Full-Text Archive Search in PMC Journal List User Guide PERMALINK Copy As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with, the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice J Appl Physiol (1985) . 2013 Dec 26;116(4):425–438. doi: 10.1152/japplphysiol.01212.2013 Search in PMC Search in PubMed View in NLM Catalog Add to search Hindlimb heating increases vascular access of large molecules to murine tibial growth plates measured by in vivo multiphoton imaging Maria A Serrat Maria A Serrat 1 Department of Anatomy and Pathology, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia; and Find articles by Maria A Serrat 1, ✉ , Morgan L Efaw Morgan L Efaw 1 Department of Anatomy and Pathology, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia; and Find articles by Morgan L Efaw 1 , Rebecca M Williams Rebecca M Williams 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York Find articles by Rebecca M Williams 2 Author information Article notes Copyright and License information 1 Department of Anatomy and Pathology, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia; and 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York ✉ Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: M. A. Serrat, Dept. of Anatomy and Pathology, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall Univ., 1542 Spring Valley Dr., Huntington, WV 25704 (e-mail: serrat@marshall.edu ). ✉ Corresponding author. Received 2013 Nov 4; Accepted 2013 Dec 23; Issue date 2014 Feb 15. Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society PMC Copyright notice PMCID: PMC3921350 PMID: 24371019 Abstract Advances in understanding the molecular regulation of longitudinal growth have led to development of novel drug therapies for growth plate disorders. Despite progress, a major unmet challenge is delivering therapeutic agents to avascular-cartilage plates. Dense extracellular matrix and lack of penetrating blood vessels create a semipermeable “barrier,” which hinders molecular transport at the vascular-cartilage interface. To overcome this obstacle, we used a hindlimb heating model to manipulate bone circulation in 5-wk-old female mice ( n = 22). Temperatures represented a physiological range of normal human knee joints. We used in vivo multiphoton microscopy to quantify temperature-enhanced delivery of large molecules into tibial growth plates. We tested the hypothesis that increasing hindlimb temperature from 22°C to 34°C increases vascular access of large systemic molecules, modeled using 10, 40, and 70 kDa dextrans that approximate sizes of physiological regulators. Vascular access was quantified by vessel diameter, velocity, and dextran leakage from subperichondrial plexus vessels and accumulation in growth plate cartilage. Growth plate entry of 10 kDa dextrans increased >150% at 34°C. Entry of 40 and 70 kDa dextrans increased <50%, suggesting a size-dependent temperature enhancement. Total dextran levels in the plexus increased at 34°C, but relative leakage out of vessels was not temperature dependent. Blood velocity and vessel diameter increased 118% and 31%, respectively, at 34°C. These results demonstrate that heat enhances vascular carrying capacity and bioavailability of large molecules around growth plates, suggesting that temperature could be a noninvasive strategy for modulating delivery of therapeutics to impaired growth plates of children. Keywords: bone, cartilage, blood, extracellular matrix, nutrient supply, permeability, multiphoton microscopy, vascular access, dextrans, temperature, skeleton, epiphyseal plate longitudinal bone growth is driven by a complex interplay of cellular signals initiated by endocrine and paracrine regulators acting on growth plate chondrocytes ( 43 , 56 , 65 ) ( Table 1 ). The field of skeletal biology has advanced with new insight into the molecular events that control postnatal bone elongation through endochondral ossification in cartilage growth plates ( 39 , 43 , 54 , 55 , 62 , 84 , 100 ). Relative to our knowledge of the cellular mechanisms, little is known about how systemic and local regulators physically reach avascular cartilage (which lacks a penetrating blood supply), how they are transported to chondrocytes through the dense extracellular matrix (ECM) ( 85 ), and how molecular size impacts their ability to diffuse through the zones of the growth plate ( 22 , 99 ). This creates an obstacle in the clinical treatment of linear growth disorders, as most systemic (and even local) therapies require vascular access to cartilage plates. The purpose of this study is to determine the effect of local temperature on transport of large molecules from the vasculature into growth plate cartilage, with an eye on translating results to a clinical setting. Table 1. Molecular weights of selected factors that are important in endochondral ossification Molecule Molecular Weight, kDa Main Effects References Glucose 0.18 Vital nutrient for growth, maintenance, and repair of the skeleton ( 50 , 63 ) Vitamin D 0.42 Modulates bioavailability of calcium; involved with apoptosis of hypertrophic chondrocytes, vascular invasion, and matrix mineralization ( 43 , 65 , 66 , 71 ) Thyroxine 0.78 Promotes chondrocyte proliferation and terminal differentiation; activates IGF-I signaling and receptor expression; activates leptin signaling in proliferative and hypertrophic chondrocytes ( 67 , 97 , 98 ) IGF-I 7.6 Major hormone of linear growth; regulates chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation; modulates bone mass acquisition and skeletal remodeling ( 48 , 100 , 101 ) PTHrP 9–23 * Diffuses into growth plate from periarticular chondrocytes; delays chondrocyte differentiation and maturation; maintains chondrocytes in a proliferative pool in a feedback loop with Ihh ( 14 , 33 , 43 , 51 , 84 , 104 ) BMPs 11–55 Regulates limb formation and outgrowth; postnatally promotes chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation; expressed in perichondrium and growth plate; may interact with Ihh/PTHrP, and FGF pathways ( 29 , 43 , 50 , 84 ) Leptin 16 Promotes linear growth by stimulating GH secretion; regulates angiogenesis and vascular invasion (possibly by enhancing MMPs); acts synergistically with thyroid hormone to promote chondrocyte proliferation and terminal differentiation; may activate PTHrP/Ihh feedback loop by stimulating PTHrP expression ( 26 , 27 , 32 , 45 , 97 ) VEGFs 17–46 Chemoattractant expressed by hypertrophic chondrocytes; essential for angiogenesis, blood vessel invasion, vascularization, and cartilage resorption at COJ ( 13 , 57 ) GH 22 Stimulates local and systemic (liver-derived) production of IGF-I; direct anabolic effects on bone density; may stimulate differentiation of resting zone chondrocytes ( 15 , 43 , 49 ) FGF-18 23 Perichondrial-derived growth factor; negative regulator of chondrocyte proliferation via activation of FGF receptor 3 signaling ( 36 , 37 ) TGF-β 25 Regulates chondrocyte proliferation and rate of hypertrophic differentiation; interacts with PTHrP and other perichondrial-derived factors ( 4 , 43 , 50 ) Ihh 49 † Stimulates chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation of reserve chondrocytes; stimulates PTHrP signaling and maintains proliferation of postnatal growth plate by feedback loop with PTHrP ( 14 , 43 , 84 , 93 ) MMP-9 92 Regulates cell migration, ECM degradation, and apoptosis; critical for vascular invasion at COJ ( 56 , 58 ) Open in a new tab Compounds shaded gray are delivered primarily through systemic circulation. Local regulators are produced by cells in the surrounding perichondrium [e.g., FGF-18 ( 47 ), parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) ( 14 ), and bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) ( 31 )] or by growth plate chondrocytes. IGF-I is also produced locally in the growth plate ( 9 ). Ihh, Indian hedgehog; GH, growth hormone; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase; COJ, chondro-osseous junction; TGF-β, transforming growth factor-β * Splice-variant isoforms ( 51 ) and species differences account for the range in apparent molecular weight of PTHrP. † Predicted molecular weight before proteolytic processing. Significant progress in understanding the molecular regulation of longitudinal growth has led to development of novel drug therapies for treating incurable growth plate diseases, such as achondroplasia, the most common form of human dwarfism. Achondroplasia is caused by an activating mutation in the FGF receptor 3, a negative regulator of linear growth ( 35 ). Strategies aimed at inhibiting the mutant receptor are complicated by the need for a systemic drug with a long-enough half-life and small enough size to diffuse into growth plates ( 46 , 47 ). Whereas promising therapies are emerging ( 24 ), transporting agents into and through the dense ECM of cartilage remains a challenge. To date, only invasive techniques have been successful at targeting molecules into specific growth plates. Experimental approaches include surgically placed catheters and localized injections ( 1 , 7 , 52 , 103 ), as well as implantable drug-releasing scaffolds ( 86 ). Noninvasive alternatives are needed. There are two components of the vascular-cartilage barrier that determine solute availability in growth plates: 1 ) ability of molecules to exit the vasculature and 2 ) ability to enter the cartilage matrix. The endpoint of interest is total uptake in the growth plate, since this is what ultimately impacts chondrocyte performance. Farnum and colleagues ( 22 , 99 ) demonstrated that molecular size was a limiting factor for entry of fluoresceinated dextrans into mouse tibial growth plates. Williams et al. ( 99 ) further described a transport block at the metaphyseal chondro-osseous junction and showed that molecules >10 kDa were essentially size excluded from the growth plate. Research by Torzilli ( 88 ) and Moeini et al. ( 64 ) demonstrated that warm temperature increases solute uptake in articular cartilage ex vivo. Our prior work ( 80 ) showed that heat increases small solute (<500 Da) uptake in growth plate cartilage in vivo. In the current study, we sought to determine whether heat could increase uptake of large molecules (≥10 kDa). We tested the hypothesis that increasing hindlimb temperature from 22°C to 34°C increases vascular access of large systemic molecules using 10, 40, and 70 kDa dextran tracers that approximate the sizes of some major physiological regulators ( Table 1 ). Vascular access was quantified using in vivo multiphoton imaging to measure vessel diameter, velocity, and dextran leakage from subperichondrial vessels and accumulation in 5-wk-old mouse tibial growth plates. Healthy human knee joint temperatures can range from under 20°C to over 37°C during normal and clinical activities ( 8 , 34 , 44 , 64 , 72 ). By modulating limb temperature within this natural range, we show that mild 34°C heating increases transport of large (≥10 kDa) molecules that are otherwise size restricted at the vascular-cartilage interface. These findings are important because they reveal the potential of temperature as a noninvasive targeting strategy for enhancing molecular uptake in specific skeletal growth plates. MATERIALS AND METHODS Animals and experimental model. All procedures were submitted to and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Marshall University (protocols 463, 527, and 558). Female C57BL/6J mice ( n = 22 total) were obtained from an in-house breeding colony at 35 days of age. We previously validated an acute temperature model using in vivo multiphoton imaging and demonstrated that hindlimb heating within a physiological range (33°C-37°C) increased growth plate uptake of the small tracer fluorescein (FL; 332 Da) ( 80 ). We used the same model here because of its well-established impact on bone circulation [reviewed in ref. ( 77 )]. Growth plate vasculature and surgical approach. The three principal vascular routes by which blood reaches the growth plate, shown in Fig. 1 , are epiphyseal vessels, metaphyseal vessels, and a circumferential ring vessel connected to a subperichondrial plexus ( 11 ). The epiphyseal and metaphyseal vessels course within the bone, whereas the circumferential vessel and its plexus are located just deep to the perichondrium (i.e., subperichondrial) that surrounds the cartilage plate ( Fig. 1 ). Soluble factors reach the growth plate through all three vascular routes ( 22 ), and temperature can affect blood flow through these vessels ( 76 , 80 , 95 ). Fig. 1. Open in a new tab Principal blood supplies of a typical long bone. A : vascular access to the growth plate is through epiphyseal vessels, metaphyseal vessels, and a subperichondrial plexus that arises from a ring vessel in the circumferential groove of Ranvier that surrounds the growth plate ( 11 ). B : oxytetracycline (OTC) fluorescence in the proximal tibia of a live mouse delineates the growth plate as a nonfluorescent band shown by arrowheads between epiphyseal and metaphyseal bone. The perichondrium and vascular network are intact. The yellow box depicts an approximate multiphoton-viewing field [line drawing modified from Serrat et al. ( 80 )]. We followed our published protocol for tibial growth plate imaging and hindlimb temperature modulation ( 80 ). To summarize, mice were given a preanesthetic dose of oxytetracycline (OTC; 50 mg/kg, Norbrook 200 mg/ml, diluted in sterile water) to facilitate growth plate localization on the multiphoton microscope ( Fig. 1 B ). Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and positioned in dorsal recumbency atop a heating pad on a customized imaging stage. The left hindlimb was extended into a thermally isolated perfusion chamber designed for temperature manipulation and water-immersion imaging. The bath contained lactated Ringer's (LR) solution. Surgical procedures were performed under a Leica MZ10F fluorescence stereomicroscope (Leica Microsystems, Buffalo Grove, IL). The proximal tibial growth plate was exposed by making a small surgical incision through the superficial fascia of the biceps femoris and gastrocnemius muscles between the medial collateral ligament and saphenous vessels, as described originally by Farnum and colleagues ( 22 , 80 ). The brief surgical procedure (<10 min total time) produced minimal bleeding and left the perichondrium, its vascular network, and joint capsule intact ( Fig. 1 B ). Hindlimb heating procedure. During pilot testing, the average temperature of the mouse hindlimb measured at room temperature in the perfusion chamber was 22°C (range 21°C–23°C). This was defined as the baseline limb temperature. Note that the mouse itself was kept on a heating pad with a feedback probe to maintain an ideal core temperature of 36.5°C. The warm limb temperature was set to 34°C, because this is just above the normal healthy human range (30°C–33°C) ( 34 , 64 ), and enzymatic degradation can occur with chronic temperatures >34°C in diseased cartilage states ( 34 ). To warm the exposed growth plate, the LR bath was heated using a perfusion pump and in-line solution heater, as detailed previously ( 80 ). Limb temperature was monitored and controlled using a thermocouple probe, which was consistently placed adjacent to the exposed growth plate. Limb temperature averaged 34°C (range 32°C–37°C) for all mice during warm-temperature imaging. The experimental protocol is summarized in Fig. 2 . Fig. 2. Open in a new tab Experimental timeline used to assess temperature-enhanced tracer entry into the growth plate. A : baseline 22°C (22C) images were captured 30 min after intracardiac injection of dextrans. Repeat images were collected in the same growth plate location 30 min later, after equilibrating the temperature to 34°C (34C). B : in vivo multiphoton images of a mouse tibial growth plate captured during a heating experiment show that warm temperature enhances entry of 10 kDa fluorescein (FL) dextrans into the growth plate. White arrowheads on the left denote the growth plate. Orientation matches Fig. 1 . Images show a representative experiment from the same animal at the same growth plate location at 22°C and 34°C. Dextrans were localized primarily in the metaphyseal bone vasculature at the bottom of the image at 22°C. After equilibrating the limb to 34°C for 30 min ( middle ), more dextran had entered the bone vasculature and infiltrated the growth plate. To ensure vascular integrity after the 10-kDa dextran injection, the mouse was then injected with the small tracer FL (332 Da), which appeared bright in both vasculature and growth plate within minutes ( right ). These results demonstrate that 1 ) the 10-kDa dextrans were partially size excluded, and 2 ) the limited 10-kDa entry was not an artifact of vessel patency or diffusion time. C : to rule out the possibility that the increase in dextran concentration was due to time and not temperature, a pilot study was conducted over the same total, 60-min time period without changing the temperature. D : time-control validation images captured at 30 ( left )- and 60 ( right )-min time points after injection of 10 kDa FL dextrans fail to show an increase in dextran concentration over time at 22°C. Fluorescent dextrans. Fluorescently labeled dextrans are biologically inert, nontoxic, water-soluble, linear polysaccharides commonly used in solute transport, uptake, size exclusion, and cell-tracking studies (64a). Dextrans were obtained commercially (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) in different molecular weights representing a size range of physiological regulators that are important in endochondral ossification ( Table 1 ): 10 kDa tetramethylrhodamine (TMR; D1868), 40 kDa FL (D1844), and 70 kDa FL (D1823). TMR and FL were selected because they could be coinjected and imaged simultaneously in separate viewing channels on the multiphoton microscope. Dextrans were prepared at 90 mg/ml in PBS. Mice were given a single bolus intracardiac injection into the left ventricle, as detailed previously ( 80 ). TMR (10 kDa) and 40 kDa FL dextrans were delivered together by a single 80-μl bolus injection ( n = 6 mice) for simultaneous dual-channel imaging on the microscope. FL dextrans (70 kDa; 30 μl) were injected separately into a different sample of animals ( n = 5). Validation experiments were carried out using 10 kDa FL (D1821; n = 4 mice; Fig. 2 ) and 40 kDa TMR dextrans (D1842; n = 2 mice) to confirm temperature results using other fluorescent conjugates. The 40-kDa TMR dextrans were used to rule out charge effects, since they have a neutral charge, and all of the other dextrans were anionic. Most fluorescent dextrans carry a net negative (anionic) charge as a result of the labeling reaction (64a). The anionic charge facilitates solubility at the concentrations necessary for visualization in the growth plate, as we had difficulty solubilizing neutral dextrans at sufficient concentrations for in vivo imaging. Representative data are only available for two animals using neutral 40 kDa TMR. Results demonstrate that neutral dextrans had the same pattern of temperature-enhanced entry as the anionic dextrans. Statistical analyses were limited to 10 kDa TMR and 40 kDa FL. In addition to solubility and sample-size differences, intensity-scale differences prohibited data pooling (see Fig. 4 ). Fig. 4. Open in a new tab Absolute fluorescence intensities in growth plate and metaphyseal bone vasculature. Error bar graphs show absolute fluorescence intensities of 10 kDa ( A ), 40 kDa ( B ), and 70 kDa ( C ) anionic dextrans in growth plate and metaphyseal regions. All values were increased at 34°C. Repeated-measures ANOVA revealed significant temperature and regional differences for all 3 tracers. A and B : there were significant temperature-by-region interactions in the 10- and 40-kDa samples, indicated by the nonparallel lines. Similar results obtained using 40 kDa neutral dextrans in a validation experiment ( D ) suggest that charge effects may be negligible (detailed in text). Means ± 1 SE are shown ( A–C ). The means of n = 2 mice are plotted ( D ), and the error bars show the range of the 2 individuals. A.U., arbitrary units; * P < 0.05, and ** P < 0.01, significant increase from baseline, assessed by post hoc paired t -testing within each region. Fluorescently labeled biomolecules. Fluorescently labeled growth hormone (GH) and dexamethasone FL (dexa-FL) were used to test the feasibility of imaging physiologically relevant molecules in the region of the growth plate. Biologically active dexa-FL (molecular weight 840.9 Da) was purchased commercially (D1383; Life Technologies) and prepared at 3.3 mg/ml in PBS. Human GH (CYT-202; ProSpec, East Brunswick, NJ) was prepared at 1 mg/ml in water and labeled using an Alexa Fluor 488 Microscale Protein Labeling Kit (A30006; Life Technologies), following the manufacturer's instructions exactly. The molecular weight of labeled GH was ∼23.2 kDa. Mice, in separate experiments ( n = 3 animals total), were given a single 150-μl ip injection of dexa-FL (500 μg) or labeled GH (90 μg), diluted in PBS. Hindlimb temperature was changed during the dexa-FL experiment to test whether heat increases entry of this small, biologically active molecule. Labeled GH was injected at 32°C to test whether this larger molecule could be visualized in the mouse tibial growth plate at physiological temperature. All other procedures followed methods used for fluorescent dextrans. In vivo multiphoton microscopy. Our previous approach for measuring solute delivery in growth plates was based on a custom-built multiphoton microscope housed at Cornell University ( 79 , 80 ). Established by Farnum, Williams, and colleagues ( 22 , 99 ), that system held the first specialized platform optimized for imaging mouse tibial growth plates in vivo. We applied the same methods here using a commercial multiphoton microscope with customized peripherals that we developed to mirror the original system. Experiments were performed in the Marshall University Molecular and Biological Imaging Center using an upright Leica TCS SP5 II multiphoton microscope with a Ti:Sapphire-pulsed femtosecond laser with dispersion compensation (Chameleon Vision II; Coherent, Santa Clara, CA). The limb was first oriented under bright-field illumination using a Leica HC PL Fluotar 5×/0.15 numerical aperture (NA) air objective to identify the region for multiphoton imaging. The growth plate was imaged using a Leica HCX IRAPO L 25×/0.95 NA water-immersion dipping objective attached to a motorized, two-position, retractable nosepiece that provided a large field of view and several millimeters of required working distance to accommodate the mouse below. Excitation wavelength was tuned to 880 nm, and emissions were collected in reflected light mode using external (nondescanned) detectors with emission filters for the separation of second harmonic generation (SHG) from collagen (407–507 nm) and OTC/FL (475–575 nm), with a 495-nm beam splitter. TMR emissions (545–625 nm filter) were separated from collagen SHG and FL using a 560-nm beam splitter (filter set 156504245; Leica). Images were captured at a scan speed of 100 Hz (5.12 s/frame), which provided optimal resolution of the growth plate and surrounding plexus. Line scans were done at 400 Hz (1.28 s/frame), which provided a good balance between resolution and required speed for blood velocity measurements. Image acquisition. SHG from collagen in the perichondrium and OTC fluorescence in epiphyseal and metaphyseal bone were used to identify the growth plate and define imaging depth. We standardized imaging depth (50 μm deep to the deepest edge of the perichondrium) by collecting sequential optical sections in a Z-series at 5 μm intervals from superficial to deep (30–40 sections) ( 80 ). Images were captured using simultaneous collection channels for SHG, FL, and TMR after mice were given an intracardiac injection of dextrans. Baseline images were captured 30 min after the dextran injection (summarized in Fig. 2 ). Our prior work has shown that accumulation of FL plateaus in the growth plate in <10 min ( 22 , 80 ). We used a 30-min time point here to account for potentially slower accumulation of the larger molecular-weight dextrans. Repeat images were collected after warming the growth plate to 34°C and allowing the temperature to equilibrate for 30 min. Growth plate location was verified by matching morphology of the SHG collagen in 22°C and 34°C Z-series. To rule out the possibility that any measured increase in dextran concentration was due to time and not temperature, a pilot study was conducted over the same total 60-min time period, without heating the limb, to ensure that dextran levels did not increase ( Fig. 2 , C and D ). Temperatures started at a cool baseline, because it would not be possible to discriminate a decrease in fluorescence intensity after the growth plate is saturated with dextran at warm temperature ( 80 ). Dextran quantification in growth plate. Dextran access to the growth plate was measured for each tracer and temperature by quantifying fluorescence intensity in 400 μm × 150 μm sample regions within the growth plate and adjacent metaphyseal bone vasculature. Fluorescence was recorded in arbitrary units (A.U.), measured as the average pixel intensity in the entire region of interest. The measured A.U. intensities were not on the same scale for each dextran conjugate, so a relative change from baseline was calculated to facilitate comparisons between animals and molecular weights. Percentage increase from 22°C baseline was defined as [(34°C A.U. − 22°C A.U.)/22°C A.U.] × 100. Raw data were also evaluated for each dextran separately, since meaningful biological data can be lost in ratios. Dextran quantification in subperichondrial plexus vessels. To quantify a change in vascular permeability with temperature, we measured extravasation of dextrans in a selected subperichondrial plexus vessel that was tracked before and after limb warming. Vessels were selected based on two primary criteria: 1 ) consistent location in the plexus and 2 ) ability to match reproducibly the same vessel at both temperatures. This was typically a branch-off of the circumferential ring vessel located at an average depth of 65 μm below the most superficial edge of the perichondrium and running perpendicular to the long axis of the bone. Vascular anatomy in this region is fairly consistent, and the paired-comparison approach helped assure data reproducibility. Collagen SHG morphology was used to verify matching image location at 22°C and 34°C. Fluorescence intensity was quantified in 15 μm × 15 μm sample regions in the intravascular space (vessel lumen) and adjacent extravascular space of the selected vessel following published methods ( 69 ). We use the term “extravasation” deliberately to refer to vessel leakiness rather than permeability per se, because we have not taken into account the pressure differential between the vessel and outside space that would be required for a true permeability measurement. Our intent was to capture a functional biological metric of vessel leakiness to assess quantitatively the amount of solute that is potentially available to infiltrate to the growth plate at different temperatures. Raw data and percentage increase values were evaluated as described above. Relative leakage was also computed as a ratio of extravascular to intravascular fluorescence. Blood velocity and vessel diameter measurements. To determine whether heat increases the carrying capacity of the plexus vasculature, blood velocity and vessel diameter were measured in the subperichondrial plexus after plasma was labeled with FL dextrans. Velocity measurements were restricted to vessels of similar baseline diameter to standardize comparisons ( 19 ). To measure velocity, a line scan was taken through the central axis of a selected vessel at a speed of 400 Hz (400 lines/s). The total time of each 512 line frame was 1.28 s. Lines were always acquired parallel to the vessel walls in the center of the vessel lumen. Z-series image stacks were used to confirm that the angle of the vessel was in the same plane as the line so that angle calibration ( 68 ) was not necessary. In the resulting image, the vertical dimension represents time (the 1.28-s interval of the line scan), and the horizontal dimension represents distance (512 lines of the scan). Red blood cells, moving through the vessel, appear as nonfluorescent dark shadows within fluorescent plasma (white). Velocity is estimated by measuring the average slope of the line created by the red blood shadows, as others have detailed ( 19 , 42 , 68 ). Vessel diameter was measured from three-dimensional (3D) image projections (Z-stacks) of selected vessels at 22°C and 34°C. The 3D projections provided a more reliable representation of vessel size and morphology compared with a single optical slice. Vessel Z-series were depth matched using collagen SHG and converted to 3D projections in ImageJ software (htpp: //imagej.nih.gov/ij ). Vessel diameter was recorded as the average of three measurements taken perpendicular to the long axis of the vessel at evenly spaced points in the same position at 22°C and 34°C. Image processing and statistical analysis. All image processing and analysis were done in ImageJ software, version 1.44. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 21.0 software, with α = 0.05 as accepted significance. Data were evaluated using two-way and repeated-measures ANOVA designs. A two-way factorial model was applied to percent-increase values, with percent increase as the dependent variable, and molecular weight and region as fixed factors. Tukey's Honestly Significant Difference multiple comparison test was used to identify significant pair-wise differences. Raw fluorescence values for each size dextran were analyzed separately using repeated-measures ANOVA to evaluate temperature effects on absolute dextran accumulation in regions of the growth plate and plexus. The model was defined with region (of growth plate or plexus vessel) as the between-subjects factor. The repeated measure was fluorescence intensity at 22°C and 34°C. Differences in blood vessel diameter and blood velocity at 22°C and 34°C were assessed using paired t -tests. RESULTS Warm limb temperature enhances large solute accumulation in the growth plate. Real-time multiphoton imaging revealed that warm temperature increased the entry of 10 kDa FL-labeled dextrans in the proximal tibial growth plate ( Fig. 2 B ). All three images in Fig. 2 B show a representative experiment from the same animal, at the same growth plate location. Qualitatively, dextran entry into the growth plate at 22°C was low when measured 30 min after injection of 10 kDa FL dextrans. Fluorescence was localized primarily in the metaphyseal bone vasculature ( Fig. 2 B ). After equilibrating the limb to 34°C for 30 min, more dextran had visibly entered the bone vasculature and infiltrated the growth plate ( Fig. 2 B ). To ensure vascular integrity after injection of the 10-kDa dextran and to demonstrate that its limited entrance was not an artifact of time (or lack thereof), the mouse was given a 50-μl bolus injection of FL (0.5%). FL is a small, 332-Da molecular-weight tracer (slightly larger than glucose; Table 1 ) that we have shown previously to saturate the growth plate fully ( 80 ). The FL entered the growth plate immediately and within 5 min, had saturated both vasculature and growth plate ( Fig. 2 B ), suggesting that entry of the 10-kDa dextran was size limited. Temperature-enhanced entry into the growth plate depends on molecular size. To assess quantitatively the effects of temperature and molecular weight on dextran transport into the growth plate, we analyzed depth-matched images of 10, 40, and 70 kDa dextran uptake in standardized regions of the growth plate and metaphyseal bone vasculature at 22°C and 34°C ( Fig. 3 B ). To facilitate comparisons among the tracers with different absolute intensity scales (see Fig. 4 ), we transformed data into standardized values, calculated as a percentage increase in tracer accumulation at 34°C relative to 22°C baseline. Figure 3 A shows that the 10-kDa dextran ( n = 6) increased >150% in both growth plate and metaphysis. The 40-kDa dextran ( n = 6 coinjected with 10 kDa) increased nearly 50% in the metaphysis but only 18% in the growth plate. The 70-kDa dextran ( n = 4) increased 64% in the metaphysis and 42% in the growth plate; however, there was substantial variation in the 70-kDa sample. Standard deviations for the 70-kDa values were nearly triple those of the 40 kDa, with correspondingly large standard errors rendered by the small sample size ( Fig. 3 A ). Fig. 3. Open in a new tab Size-selective temperature enhancement in the growth plate. A : temperature-enhancement graph quantitatively shows a size-selective increase in dextran entry in the growth plate at 34°C. Data were collected in 400 × 150 μm sample regions in the growth plate and metaphyseal bone at a standardized depth, 50 μm below the deepest edge of the perichondrium ( B ). Enhancement ratios are plotted as percentage increase at 34°C from 22°C baseline. The 10-kDa dextrans increased >150% in both growth plate (black) and metaphyseal (gray) regions. The 40-kDa dextrans (coinjected with 10 kDa) increased only 18% in the growth plate and 50% in the metaphysis, and the 70-kDa dextrans (injected into separate mice) increased 42% in the growth plate and 64% in the metaphysis. These results suggest that the larger dextrans were size restricted from entering the growth plate. Means ± 1 SE are shown. Sample sizes are on the x -axis; ** P < 0.01, significant difference by paired t -test. Two-way ANOVA applied to the standardized values was used to determine whether dextran increase at 34°C depended on molecular-weight and/or anatomical region (growth plate vs. metaphyseal vasculature). The analysis revealed a significant effect of molecular weight (F = 8.98, P = 0.001) but no difference due to region (F = 0.57, P = 0.457); there was no interaction (F = 0.09, P = 0.917). Tukey's post hoc multiple comparison testing showed that the increase in the 10-kDa tracer was significantly greater than both 40 kDa ( P = 0.001) and 70 kDa ( P = 0.015). There was no difference between the 40 kDa and 70 kDa ( P = 0.834). Intraregion comparisons for the 40-kDa dextrans showed a 30% greater increase in relative metaphyseal fluorescence compared with the growth plate (paired t = 5.19, P = 0.002). There was no difference in relative increase between growth plate and metaphysis for the 10-kDa dextrans (paired t = 0.28, P = 0.79; Fig. 3 A ). There was also no difference in relative increase between growth plate and metaphyseal regions in the 70 kDa (paired t = 0.78, P = 0.49), although the mean values differed by >20%. The 70-kDa sample was small, and standard deviations were large, suggesting the potential for a statistically significant difference with a larger sample size. To investigate further the effects of temperature on dextran distribution in regions of the growth plate and metaphyseal vasculature, we analyzed raw data for each molecular weight separately using repeated-measures ANOVA. Absolute values could not be compared across molecular-weight categories, because the fluorescence intensities of each fluorophore were not on the same scale ( Fig. 4 , A–C ). Values were increased at 34°C for all tracers and all regions ( Fig. 4 ). For the 10-kDa dextrans, absolute fluorescence intensities in the growth plate and metaphysis at 34°C were each more than double their 22°C intensity ( Fig. 4 A ). Repeated-measures ANOVA revealed significant differences between baseline 22°C and warm 34°C temperatures (F = 17.82, P = 0.001), as well as between growth plate and metaphyseal regions (F = 19.34, P < 0.001). There was a significant temperature-by-region interaction (F = 5.36, P = 0.02), revealed by the steep increase in metaphyseal fluorescence at 34°C, illustrated in Fig. 4 A . There were significant temperature (F = 37.54, P < 0.001) and region (F = 12.47, P = 0.002) differences for the 40-kDa dextrans, as well as a significant temperature-by-region interaction (F = 22.25, P < 0.001; Fig. 4 B ). There were also significant temperature (F = 4.44, P = 0.04) and region (F = 58.67, P < 0.001) differences in the 70-kDa sample, but there was no interaction (F = 2.12, P > 0.10; Fig. 4 C ). From these collective results ( Figs. 2 – 4 ), we conclude that temperature size selectively increased dextran accumulation significantly in regions of the growth plate and metaphyseal vasculature. To rule out the possibility that temperature-enhanced entry of 40 and 70 kDa dextrans was limited by their negative charge rather than their size (potentially repelled by the negative charge of proteoglycans in cartilage), validation experiments were conducted using neutral 40 kDa TMR dextrans. Neutral dextrans were not used in the other analyses because of their low solubility at the concentrations required for in vivo visualization (see materials and methods ). Figure 4 D shows the raw data from n = 2 mice injected with neutral dextrans. The pattern of distribution in growth plate and metaphysis, as well as the magnitude of the temperature response, matches results from the anionic, 40-kDa FL dextrans ( Fig. 4 B ). These limited data, which allowed us to separate the effects of size from those of charge, are consistent with the null hypothesis that there is no effect of charge on temperature-enhanced entry into the growth plate. Whereas statistical testing was not possible, due to the small sample size, our conclusion from these neutral dextran data is that size and not charge is the major limiting factor for entry into the growth plate. Heat increases dextran accumulation in subperichondrial plexus vessels. To assess temperature effects on vascular leakiness, we measured extravasation of dextrans in vessels of the subperichondrial plexus (see Fig. 6 B ). Raw data were transformed as detailed above. Figure 5 A shows that relative to baseline 22°C levels, the 10-kDa dextran ( n = 4) increased >120% in the extravascular space and nearly 90% in the vessel lumen at 34°C. The 40-kDa dextrans ( n = 4 injected at the same time as the 10-kDa dextrans) increased ∼185% in both extravascular and intravascular spaces, and the 70-kDa dextrans ( n = 5 injected into a separate group of animals) increased >185% in both compartments ( Fig. 5 A ). Two-way ANOVA applied to these data revealed no significant differences due to molecular weight (F = 1.29, P = 0.297) or region (F = 0.097, P = 0.759); there was no interaction (F = 0.03, P = 0.968). Fig. 6. Open in a new tab Absolute fluorescence intensities in vessel lumen and extravascular space. Error bar graphs show increases in absolute fluorescence intensities of 10 kDa ( A ), 40 kDa ( B ), and 70 kDa ( C ) dextrans in extra- and intravascular regions of subperichondrial plexus vessels at 34°C. Repeated-measures ANOVA confirmed significant temperature effects for all 3 tracers. There was no difference between regions for the 10-kDa dextrans, which were distributed nearly evenly among extra- and intravascular spaces. There was no temperature by region interaction (note that the lines are essentially parallel). In contrast, there were significant temperature and regional differences in the 40- and 70-kDa dextrans, as well as significant interactions (note the lines are not parallel). D : relative dextran leakage (R1/R2) did not differ between 22°C and 34°C for any molecular weight, but leakage of the 40- and 70-kDa dextrans was only ½ that of the 10-kDa dextrans. More of the larger dextrans were retained in the vessel lumen at both temperatures (see Fig. 7 ). Means ± 1 SE are shown. Asterisks indicate a significant increase from 22°C baseline, assessed by post hoc paired t -testing within each region (* P < 0.05; ** P < 0.01). Fig. 5. Open in a new tab Temperature-enhanced dextran accumulation in the subperichondrial plexus. A : temperature-enhancement graph shows a quantitative increase in dextran accumulation in subperichondrial plexus vessels at 34°C. Data were collected in 15 × 15 μm sample regions in extravascular (R1; black) and intravascular (R2; gray) compartments ( B ). Enhancement ratios are plotted as percentage increase at 34°C from 22°C baseline. All regions and tracers increased by ∼90% or more. There were no statistically significant differences in percent increase among the molecular weights or between regions. Means ± 1 SE are shown. Sample sizes are on the x -axis. To ensure that meaningful biological data were not lost in the transformed percentages, we evaluated absolute fluorescence intensities for each tracer individually ( Fig. 6 ). Statistical comparisons were not made across molecular-weight categories because their fluorescence intensity scales were not the same ( Fig. 6 , A–C ). Repeated-measures ANOVA for the 10-kDa dextrans revealed a significant temperature effect (F = 15.14, P = 0.004), with nearly twice as much accumulation in both extravascular and intravascular spaces at 34°C compared with 22°C values ( Fig. 6 A ). Fluorescence intensity did not differ between intravascular and extravascular regions at either temperature (F = 0.021, P = 0.889), and there was no temperature-by-region interaction (F = 0.44, P = 0.532; Fig. 6 A ). These results indicate that total delivery of the 10-kDa dextrans increased with temperature, but their capacity to extravasate out of the vessel lumen did not appear to be temperature dependent (dextrans were distributed evenly in the intravascular and extravascular spaces at both temperatures). The 40-kDa dextrans differed significantly by temperature (F = 35.42, P < 0.001) and region (F = 3.68, P = 0.05). There was a significant temperature-by-region interaction (F = 7.10, P < 0.05), as evident by the steep increase in intravascular fluorescence at 34°C ( Fig. 6 B ). There were also significant temperature (F = 25.09, P < 0.001) and region (F = 7.64, P < 0.05) effects in the 70-kDa sample, as well as a significant interaction (F = 5.30, P < 0.05; Fig. 6 C ). Fluorescence intensities of 40 and 70 kDa dextrans increased nearly threefold in both intravascular and extravascular spaces at 34°C ( Fig. 6 , B and C ). These results suggest that warm temperature increased the amount of 40 and 70 kDa dextrans in vessels of the subperichondrial plexus, but their relative extravasation out of the lumen did not appear to be temperature dependent ( Figs. 6 D and 7 ). Fig. 7. Open in a new tab Increased leakage from plexus vessels after heating. Multiphoton images of a single location in the mouse tibial plexus at 22°C ( left ) and 34°C ( right ) show a size-selective increase in vessel leakage, favoring smaller molecule passage at warm temperature. Second harmonic generation (SHG) from collagen in the perichondrium ( top ), 10 kDa tetramethylrhodamine (TMR) dextrans ( middle ), and 40 kDa FL dextrans ( bottom ) were viewed simultaneously in separate channels. Vessels were visualized in a region of the subperichondrial plexus represented in Fig. 1 . Morphology of SHG collagen in the perichondrium ( top ) is essential for standardizing location to depth-match the images and track the same vessels at different temperatures. Red arrows ( middle , right ) show 10 kDa TMR leakage out of the vessels at 34°C. Yellow arrowheads ( bottom , right ) show that the larger, 40-kDa FL dextrans were retained in the vessel lumen. Figure 6 D is a plot of relative dextran leakage, calculated as the ratio of extravascular-to-intravascular fluorescence intensities (R1/R2). Although steric effects are evident (greater leakage of 10 kDa relative to 40 or 70 kDa dextrans; F = 11.97, P < 0.001; Fig. 7 ), there were no size-dependent temperature effects. Relative dextran leakage (R1/R2) did not differ between 22°C and 34°C for any molecular weight (F = 0.016, P > 0.90; Fig. 6 D ). Based on these data ( Figs. 5 – 7 ), we conclude that temperature significantly increases dextran accumulation in the microcirculation surrounding the growth plate. Relative leakage out of the vessels, however, appears to be dependent on molecular size and not temperature. Heat increases vessel diameter and blood velocity in subperichondrial plexus vessels. To determine whether heat increases the total blood supply in vessels surrounding the growth plate, blood velocity and vessel diameter were measured in selected vessels of the subperichondrial plexus. Figure 8 shows the same blood vessel in the tibial plexus of a 5-wk-old mouse imaged at 22°C and then 30 min later, after warming its limb to 34°C. In a sample of n = 8 individual mice ( Fig. 8 ), there was a 31% relative increase in vessel diameter at 34°C. Average diameter increased from 22 μm to >28 μm in 30 min (paired t = 7.89, P < 0.001). From these data, we conclude that warm temperature causes acute vasodilation in the plexus microvasculature. Fig. 8. Open in a new tab Increased vessel diameter in tibial growth plate plexus after warming. Multiphoton images of the same vessel in the subperichondrial plexus of a live, 5-wk-old mouse show a 31% relative increase in vessel diameter after 30 min of 34°C warming after 22°C baseline ( top ). Vessels were visualized at 880 nm illumination after an intracardiac injection of 40 kDa FL dextrans to label the plasma (white). Vessel location was tracked using SHG from collagen in the perichondrium (see Fig. 7 ). Vertical yellow lines show diameter measurements. On average, vessel diameter increased from 22 μm to >28 μm in 30 min, demonstrating the sensitivity of the microvasculature to temperature change; (*** P < 0.001). To quantify the effects of temperature on blood velocity, line-scan images of plexus vessels were generated along the directionality of the blood flow ( Fig. 9 B ). Movements of red blood cells were tracked by the shadows within the fluorescent plasma. Average slope of the red blood cell shadows was used to calculate velocity. In paired comparisons of n = 5 individual mice, the average relative increase in blood velocity was >118% ( Fig. 9 A ). There was noted variation in baseline 22°C velocity, from under 1,000 μm/s to nearly 2,000 μm/s (minimum 730 μm/s; maximum 1,896 μm/s). This variation could be attributable to differences in vessel diameter, although we chose vessels of similar baseline diameter in efforts to minimize interanimal variability. Velocity nevertheless increased at 34°C in all cases, ranging from just over 1,000 μm/s to >5,000 μm/s ( Fig. 9 A ; minimum 1,281 μm/s; maximum 5,252 μm/s). On average, blood velocity at 34°C was over double its value at 22°C (paired t = 2.54, P = 0.032). From these collective data ( Figs. 8 and 9 ), we conclude that heating the limb to 34°C increases the total amount of blood in the subperichondrial plexus by increasing blood velocity and blood vessel diameter. Fig. 9. Open in a new tab Heat-enhanced blood velocity in tibial plexus vessels. Scans were performed on the same vessel at the same matched depth at 22°C and 34°C. Morphology of the collagen assessed by SHG was used to verify depth (see Fig. 7 ). A : paired comparisons show >118% relative increase in red blood cell velocity at 34°C (* P < 0.05). Line-scan images of plexus vessels were generated along the directionality of the blood flow (parallel to the vessel wall in the center of the lumen) after injection of FL dextrans ( B ). Plasma is illuminated (white), and red blood cells moving through the vessel appear as nonfluorescent, dark shadows. The vertical dimension of the image represents time (the 1.28-s interval of the line scan), and the horizontal dimension represents distance (width of the 512 line scan). Velocity was calculated as the average slope of the line (Δd/Δt), created by the red blood shadows. On average, blood velocity at 34°C was over double its baseline value at 22°C ( A ). B : in a different experiment, the limb was cooled from 34°C to 25°C. Blood velocity decreased 43% from 1,280 μm/s to 730 μm/s in a time span of 10 min. Fluorescently labeled biomolecules enter the growth plate in vivo. To demonstrate the feasibility of imaging fluorescently labeled biomolecules in the growth plate in vivo and to confirm temperature results using physiologically relevant tracers, proof-of-concept experiments were conducted using biologically active dexa-FL ( Fig. 10 , A and B ) and labeled GH ( Fig. 10 , C and D ). Consistent with results obtained using biologically inert dextrans, less than one-half of the amount of dexa-FL was measured in the growth plate and in the region of the metaphyseal bone at 22°C baseline ( Fig. 10 A ) compared with 32°C ( Fig. 10 B ). In a separate experiment, labeled GH (23.2 kDa) was injected at 32°C to demonstrate its entry into the mouse tibial growth plate at physiological temperature. Results validate the ability to visualize labeled GH entry into the growth plate under controlled experimental conditions in vivo, similar to biologically inert dextrans ( Fig. 10 , C and D ). Fig. 10. Open in a new tab In vivo multiphoton images of fluorescently labeled biomolecules in the growth plate. Proof-of-concept experiments demonstrate feasibility of visualizing biologically active dexamethasone FL (dexa-FL; Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY; A and B ) and labeled growth hormone (GH; C and D ) in the region of the growth plate. Growth plate is between white arrowheads in all images. The dexa-FL images ( A and B ) show vessels in the subperichondrial plexus in the same mouse limb at 22°C ( A ) and after 30 min equilibration at 32°C ( B ). Dexa-FL appears white in the vessels and surrounding tissues. In this single, preliminary experiment, <1/2 of the amount of dexa-FL was measured in the growth plate and in the region of the metaphyseal bone at 22°C baseline compared with 32°C. Results are consistent with biologically inert dextrans. In a separate experiment, labeled GH (23.2 kDa) was injected at 32°C to demonstrate its entry into the mouse tibial growth plate at physiological temperature. Time-lapse images ( C and D ) show OTC fluorescence (yellow pseudocolor) in metaphyseal bone immediately before the injection ( C ) and 30 min later ( D ), after injecting labeled GH (blue-gray pseudocolor). These images demonstrate the potential of studying labeled biomolecule entry in the growth plate in real time under controlled experimental conditions. DISCUSSION This study is, to our knowledge, the first of its kind to assess quantitatively temperature effects on large solute (≥10 kDa) accumulation in the growth plate and its microvasculature using real-time in vivo multiphoton microscopy. This work is also the first to demonstrate entry of biological molecules in the growth plate in vivo. Developments in imaging technology over the past decade have yielded unprecedented opportunities to study molecular transport to growth plate cartilage in vivo ( 22 , 99 ), extending our ability to address fundamental biological questions that were previously unanswerable. With the use of a live animal model, this study adds valuable data to our understanding of the physical mechanisms that can regulate molecular delivery to cartilage plates. We imaged 10, 40, and 70 kDa fluorescently labeled dextrans, size-proxy tracers for physiological molecules, to test directly the hypothesis that local hindlimb heating increases vascular access of large molecules to growth plates. Vascular access was quantified by measuring: dextran accumulation in growth plate and metaphyseal bone; dextran leakage from subperichondrial vasculature and accumulation in the extravascular space; and blood vessel diameter and red blood cell velocity in selected subperichondrial plexus vessels. The novel results that robustly support our hypothesis are as follows: 1 ) warm limb temperature enhances large solute accumulation in the growth plate; 2 ) temperature-enhanced entry into the growth plate depends on molecular size; 3 ) heat increases dextran accumulation in the subperichondrial plexus surrounding the growth plate; 4 ) relative leakage out of the plexus vessels appears to depend on molecular size and not temperature; and 5 ) heat increases volume of blood delivered to the growth plate, as measured by vessel diameter and blood velocity in subperichondrial plexus vessels. We chose temperatures deliberately that were within the physiological range measured in healthy, articulating knee joints during normal activities and therapeutic applications ( 8 , 34 , 44 , 64 , 72 ). We have made the basic assumption (see Caveats and technical considerations) that intra-articular knee-joint temperature is representative of proximal tibial growth plate temperature, given the close anatomical proximity of the epiphyseal cartilage to its adjacent joint cavity. Our results demonstrate that 34°C heat, relative to 22°C baseline, increases the arrival and entry of large molecules that are otherwise size restricted at the vascular-cartilage interface of the growth plate ( 22 , 99 ). Percent enhancement (relative increase) values were >150% for 10 kDa dextrans, and 18% and 42% for the 40- and 70-kDa dextrans, respectively, indicating a size dependence. These results make an important contribution to understanding basic growth plate nutrition and for revealing heat as a possible mechanism to overcome the transport block created by the dense cartilage matrix. Our data suggest that temperature could be an easily exploitable variable for regulating vascular access to avascular growth cartilage. We propose that heat could be used clinically to enhance delivery of large molecules to growth plates with local specificity. Temperature-enhanced entry into the growth plate depends on molecular size. The dextran results are consistent with our prior temperature study using the small tracer FL ( 80 ), which showed that heat is permissive to tracer exit from the vasculature and mobility through the growth plate in vivo. Here, we demonstrate that both temperature and size impact transport into the growth plate. Dextran levels were higher in the metaphyseal vasculature relative to the growth plate at both temperatures ( Figs. 3 and 4 ). Williams et al. ( 99 ) described a transport block at the metaphyseal chondro-osseous junction, which appears to restrict movement of large (≥10 kDa) solutes into the growth plate. Part of this block could be due to the impermeable nature of the calcified cartilage matrix in this region ( 85 ). Composition and structure (density, organization) of the matrix are thought to play significant roles in governing molecular diffusion in cartilage ( 6 , 16 , 21 , 50 , 81 – 83 , 89 , 90 , 102 ). Our data show that mild heat (34°C) can increase significantly the entry of large molecules that are otherwise restricted from the growth plate at cooler (22°C) temperature. However, our results also demonstrate that the magnitude of the temperature effect is dependent on size: relative increase of 10 kDa dextrans in the growth plate at 34°C was >150%, whereas that of the 40- and 70-kDa dextrans was <50%. Our results are consistent with those of others, who have established size ( 3 , 16 , 50 , 60 , 88 – 90 ) and temperature ( 12 , 64 , 85 , 88 ) effects on solute diffusion through cartilage zones. The knowledge of the size-exclusion limits of growth plate transport and the enhancement ratio of temperature could also be of great use in designing drug-delivery experiments. In terms of temperature, Stambaugh and Brighton ( 85 ) demonstrated that diffusion coefficients for radioactively labeled insulin in the reserve growth plate zone were over twofold greater at 22°C than at 4°C. In terms of size, Byun et al. ( 12 ) found that a 48-kDa anti-IL-6 antigen-binding fragment could diffuse into articular-cartilage explants, whereas full-sized, 150-kDa immunoglobulin antibodies could not ( 60 ). Urech and others ( 92 ), likewise, found that a single-chain Fv antibody against TNF-α could penetrate synovial cartilage effectively in vivo and in vitro, whereas the full-length TNF-α antibody could not. Rothenfluh and colleagues ( 75 ) studied transport of cartilage-targeting nanoparticles and found a 14.9-fold higher accumulation of 38 nm particles in cartilage grafts compared with 96 nm particles, even though both size particles were linked with a cartilage-targeting peptide sequence. Heat increases dextran accumulation in subperichondrial plexus vessels. We examined dextran leakage from subperichondrial plexus vessels at 22°C and 34°C to determine whether vascular exit was affected by size and/or temperature. Studies of tumor vascular permeability demonstrate that high molecular-weight dextrans (40–70 kDa) have a low permeability and long plasma half-life, which limits their penetration and accumulation in tissues ( 18 ). In most organs, capillary pore sizes are thought to restrict the passage of dextrans with a molecular weight >20 kDa ( 61 ). Others have demonstrated that heat increases vascular endothelial permeability ( 5 , 25 , 59 , 91 ). Cold temperature is known to decrease membrane fluidity ( 41 ) and increase blood viscosity ( 20 , 30 , 73 ). Therefore, we hypothesized that heat would enhance movement of high molecular-weight dextrans that otherwise have limited permeation in tissues. We found that heat enhanced dextran accumulation in the microcirculation surrounding the growth plate as expected ( Figs. 5 – 7 ), but their capacity to extravasate out of the vessel lumen (relative leakage) did not appear to be affected by temperature. Extravascular-to-intravascular ratios were the same at both temperatures ( Fig. 6 D ). However, the steric effects are noteworthy. The larger 40- and 70-kDa dextrans remained more in the vessel lumen at both temperatures, whereas the smaller 10-kDa dextrans extravasated out into the interstitial space ( Figs. 6 D and 7 ). Therefore, the reduced entry of the larger dextrans in the growth plate at both temperatures was due, at least in part, to their inability to exit the vasculature. What is unclear is why temperature had a size-selective effect on increasing growth plate permeability but not on relative vessel leakiness ( Fig. 6 D ). The increase in intravascular fluorescence intensity at 34°C appears to be related to a decrease in hematocrit (more plasma relative to red blood cells), although we did not quantify this effect. Extravascular fluorescence increased proportionately at 34°C, suggesting that vessel leakiness does not contribute to the size-selective temperature effect on growth plate permeability. Permeation through the dense cartilage matrix of the growth plate appears to be the transport-limiting factor, which can, at least, be partially overcome by warm temperature. Heat increases vessel diameter and blood velocity in subperichondrial plexus vessels. Classic experiments have demonstrated that short-term heat exposure increases total blood delivery to bone ( 23 , 28 , 76 ). Here, we show that these differences are evident in the growth plate-associated microcirculation, through which nutrients and systemic regulators are delivered to cartilage. By increasing limb temperature 12°C within a normal physiological range, we were able to enhance the carrying capacity of the vasculature, as measured by vessel diameter and red blood cell velocity. Vessel diameter increased >30%, and velocity doubled its 22°C baseline value. An estimated volume calculation (∼velocity × diameter 2 ) shows that temperature increases the volume of blood delivered to the growth plate by approximately threefold, providing a reservoir of molecules that could potentially extravasate out of the vasculature and into the cartilage matrix. This study is the first to demonstrate the temperature sensitivity of blood flow regulation in the microvasculature surrounding the growth plate. We conclude that the increase in vascular carrying capacity (increased blood velocity and vessel diameter) is at least one mechanism by which molecular access to the growth plate is enhanced by heat. Caveats and technical considerations. We are aware of the limitations and predetermined assumptions upon which our study is based. Two main caveats are: 1 ) the method of selecting and measuring limb temperature and 2 ) the physical and physiological limitations of biologically inert, anionic dextrans. First, our selected temperatures were based on published thermocouple recordings of the human intra-articular knee capsule, measured during a range of normal activities ( 8 , 34 , 44 , 64 , 72 ). The extension of these temperatures to the growth plate requires the coarse assumption that intra-articular knee temperature is a good representative of proximal tibial growth plate temperature. This also requires a corollary assumption that temperature of our perfusion bath, as recorded at the site of limb imaging, reflects internal limb temperature. We did not take direct thermocouple recordings of the growth plate but instead, recorded noninvasive temperatures in a consistent location immediately adjacent to the growth plate. There have been few experimental attempts to record actual growth plate temperature due to the invasive necessity of implanting a telemetry device. Heat (from reactive hyperemia) ( 74 ), tissue damage ( 87 ), and inability to obtain consistent measurements ( 10 ) are all practical technical issues that have prevented others from accurately recording growth plate temperature directly. However, indirect methods have been validated. In vivo studies have successfully used thermocouple and noncontact methods to measure differences precisely in temperatures of the bone surface ( 17 ), muscle ( 95 ), subcutaneous layer ( 23 ), and overlying skin ( 2 , 10 , 17 , 70 , 77 , 78 ), which were directly attributable to a procedural manipulation of the growth plate and its blood supply in a live animal. Doyle and Smart ( 17 ) simultaneously compared thermistor readings from devices that were surgically placed on the surface of the rat distal femur with those placed on the external surface of the limb during short-wave diathermy heating. They found that the temperatures were the same in both sites and concluded that surface temperature could be used as an indicator of internal limb temperature ( 17 ). Therefore, we are confident that the primary assumptions of our experiments are scientifically grounded with respect to our method of modulating and recording growth plate temperature in the context of this study. The second and more insidious caveat involves the use of biologically inert, anionic dextrans as a generic proxy for physiological regulators, such as circulating steroid hormones and peptides. Differences between dextrans and proteins range from charge, deformability, and configuration ( 96 ) to transport molecules ( 53 ) and carriers ( 40 ), which regulate solute bioavailability. Electrostatic exclusion was considered because of the potential for anionic dextrans to be repelled by negatively charged proteoglycans in cartilage ( 94 ). An important note is that biological molecules can be subject to this same exclusion due to the negative charges added by excessive protein glycosylation ( 40 ). Arkill and Winlove ( 6 ) studied transport of neutral and anionic, low molecular-weight tracers (<500 Da) that were predicted to exhibit minimal size exclusion in articular-cartilage explants. They found that static loading reduced the uptake of the anionic tracers but did not affect neutral tracers, suggesting the potential for charge effects. Evans and Quinn ( 21 ) also found differences in diffusivity among positive, negative, and neutral 10-kDa dextrans under conditions of cartilage explant loading ex vivo. These results are difficult to interpret, however, because it is not possible to separate the effects of mechanical load on cartilage structure from those of charge-limited diffusivity alone. Avoiding complications of molecular charge, Torzilli and colleagues ( 88 – 90 ) used uncharged solutes, ranging from 180 Da to 70 kDa, to study size effects on diffusion through intact cartilage under a variety of experimental conditions. They reported high diffusivity of small solutes through cartilage matrix but limited movement of the larger solutes, as others have similarly shown ( 3 , 16 , 50 , 60 ). We conducted validation experiments using neutral 40-kDa dextrans and found that heat-enhanced transport using large neutral solutes ( Fig. 4 D ) matched our results using anionic dextrans ( Fig. 4 ). Although we cannot completely eliminate charge effects on cartilage transport in vivo based on this limited sample, we are confident in the ability to test our primary temperature hypothesis using different molecular-weight anionic dextrans. However, molecular weight and charge are only two of many variables that affect transport mechanisms; factors such as deformability and carriers, must also be considered. For example, a neutral globular protein may be less conformable than an equivalent molecular-weight anionic linear dextran when considering movement through a fixed-dimension pore. Albro et al. ( 3 ) demonstrated that transport of transferrin (80 kDa) through cartilage disks was less enhanced by dynamic loading than similarly sized dextrans (70 kDa), which are size asymmetric and more deformable compared with some rigid globular proteins ( 96 ). Such complexities are among many confounding variables that cannot be modeled with dextrans and hence, the impetus for our current work using fluorescently labeled biomolecules. The knowledge base attained here with dextrans sets a solid foundation for studying delivery of labeled biomolecules, which have already shown promise for in vivo delivery to the growth plate ( Fig. 10 ). Significance and future directions. The primary motivation of this research was to collect baseline data that would contribute to the design of heat-based therapies for targeting molecular delivery into growth plates. We found that mild limb heating effectively enhanced the transport of large (≥10 kDa) molecules that are normally size restricted at the vascular-cartilage interface. Significant biological effects could result from enhancing penetration of a large molecule that might otherwise not enter the growth plate. The in vivo imaging approach is unique, because it enables us to address questions that were previously unanswerable and offers novel insight into growth plate regulation by way of vascular access of local and systemic molecules. Temperature modulation through the application of mild heat could be a simple permeation-enhancing method for improving drug delivery to cartilage. Local heating could be used to control natural joint temperature fluctuation, thus stabilizing temperatures at a transport optimal for consistent drug delivery. The next important steps are to determine the most effective doses, delivery routes, and timing for targeting delivery to the growth plate. In vivo imaging of labeled biomolecules ( Fig. 10 ) will be especially valuable in this exciting, clinically relevant pursuit. GRANTS Support for this project was provided by generous funding from the National Science Foundation (NSF; grant number MRI-R2 0959012), NASA West Virginia Space Grant Consortium (Research Initiation Grant), Marshall University ADVANCE (NSF-sponsored program; grant number 0929997), Marshall University School of Medicine Anatomy and Pathology, and the University of Kentucky Center for Clinical and Translational Science Pilot Program (National Center for Research Resources and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, NIH grant number UL1TR000117). M. A. Serrat is a participant in the United States Bone and Joint Young Investigator's Initiative, and this research was supported, in part, by the U.S. Bone and Joint Initiative. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. DISCLOSURES The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Author contributions: M.A.S. conception and design of research; M.A.S. performed experiments; M.A.S. analyzed data; M.A.S. and R.M.W. interpreted results of experiments; M.A.S. and M.L.E. prepared figures; M.A.S. drafted manuscript; M.A.S., M.L.E., and R.M.W. edited and revised manuscript; M.A.S., M.L.E., and R.M.W. approved final version of manuscript. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Dr. Billy Howard and the Marshall Animal Resource Facility for mouse care; Cornelia Farnum and Elaine Hardman for technical advice and critical suggestions; and Marcos Serrat, D. Neff, B. Antonsen, W. Zipfel (Cornell Imaging), R. Hemm (Coherent), K. Fertig (Leica), M. Harrison, M. Norton, and the staff of Marshall University Molecular and Biological Imaging Center for assistance with the multiphoton microscope configuration and experimental platform. We also thank J. Denvir for help with statistical analysis; G. Ion for table assistance; L. Richardson for protein-labeling help; H. Williams, A. Williams, J. Vance, and G. Ion for research aid; and C. Farnum and G. Ion for critically reviewing the manuscript. We are grateful to Marcos Serrat for design and construction of the anesthesia scavenging system, laser safety curtain, and all customized peripherals necessary to conduct this work. This work was aided by the use of facilities at the Huntington, West Virginia, VA Medical Center. REFERENCES 1. Abbaspour A, Takata S, Matsui Y, Katoh S, Takahashi M, Yasui N. Continuous infusion of insulin-like growth factor-I into the epiphysis of the tibia. Int Orthop 32: 395–402, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 2. Al-Hilli F, Wright EA. The effects of changes in the environmental temperature on the growth of the tail bones in the mouse. Br J Exp Pathol 64: 34–42, 1983 [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 3. Albro MB, Banerjee RE, Oungoulian SR, Chen B, del Palomar AP, Hung CT, Ateshian GA. Dynamic loading of immature epiphyseal cartilage pumps nutrients out of vascular canals. J Biomech 44: 1654–1659, 2011 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 4. Alvarez J, Horton J, Sohn P, Serra R. The perichondrium plays an important role in mediating the effects of TGF-beta1 on endochondral bone formation. Dev Dyn 221: 311–321, 2001 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 5. Ang C, Dawes J. The effects of hyperthermia on human endothelial monolayers: modulation of thrombotic potential and permeability. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 5: 193–199, 1994 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 6. Arkill KP, Winlove CP. Solute transport in the deep and calcified zones of articular cartilage. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 16: 708–714, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 7. Baron J, Huang Z, Oerter KE, Bacher JD, Cutler GB. Dexamethasone acts locally to inhibit longitudinal bone growth in rabbits. Am J Physiol 263: E489–E492, 1992 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 8. Becher C, Springer J, Feil S, Cerulli G, Paessler HH. Intra-articular temperatures of the knee in sports—an in-vivo study of jogging and alpine skiing. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 9: 46, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 9. Brito I, Gil-Peña H, Molinos I, Loredo V, Henriques-Coelho T, Caldas-Afonso A, Santos F. Growth cartilage expression of growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor I axis in spontaneous and growth hormone induced catch-up growth. Growth Horm IGF Res 22: 129–133, 2012 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 10. Brodin H. Longitudinal bone growth and nutrition of the epiphyseal cartilages and the local blood supply; an experimental study in the rabbit. Acta Orthop Scand Suppl 20: 1–92, 1955 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 11. Brookes M, Revell WJ. Blood Supply of Bone: Scientific Aspects. New York: Springer, 1998 [ Google Scholar ] 12. Byun S, Sinskey YL, Yu YC, Ort T, Kavalkovich K, Sivakumar P, Hunziker EB, Frank EH, Grodzinsky AJ. Transport of anti-IL-6 antigen binding fragments into cartilage and the effects of injury. Arch Biochem Biophys 532: 15–22, 2013 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 13. Carlevaro MF, Cermelli S, Cancedda R, Descalzi Cancedda F. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in cartilage neovascularization and chondrocyte differentiation: auto-paracrine role during endochondral bone formation. J Cell Sci 113: 59–69, 2000 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 14. Chau M, Forcinito P, Andrade AC, Hegde A, Ahn S, Lui JC, Baron J, Nilsson O. Organization of the Indian hedgehog—parathyroid hormone-related protein system in the postnatal growth plate. J Mol Endocrinol 47: 99–107, 2011 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 15. Chawla RK, Parks JS, Rudman D. Structural variants of human growth hormone: biochemical, genetic, and clinical aspects. Annu Rev Med 34: 519–547, 1983 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 16. Chin HC, Moeini M, Quinn TM. Solute transport across the articular surface of injured cartilage. Arch Biochem Biophys 535: 241–247, 2013 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 17. Doyle JR, Smart BW. Stimulation of bone growth by short-wave diathermy. J Bone Joint Surg Am 45: 15–24, 1963 [ Google Scholar ] 18. Dreher MR, Liu W, Michelich CR, Dewhirst MW, Yuan F, Chilkoti A. Tumor vascular permeability, accumulation, and penetration of macromolecular drug carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst 95: 335–344, 2006 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 19. Dunn KW, Sutton TA, Sandoval RM. Live-animal imaging of renal function by multiphoton microscopy. Curr Protoc Cytom Chapter 12: Unit 12.9, 2007 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 20. Eckmann DM, Bowers S, Stecker M, Cheung AT. Hematocrit, volume expander, temperature, and shear rate effects on blood viscosity. Anesth Analg 91: 539–545, 2000 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 21. Evans RC, Quinn TM. Solute diffusivity correlates with mechanical properties and matrix density of compressed articular cartilage. Arch Biochem Biophys 442: 1–10, 2005 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 22. Farnum CE, Lenox M, Zipfel W, Horton W, Williams R. In vivo delivery of fluoresceinated dextrans to the murine growth plate: imaging of three vascular routes by multiphoton microscopy. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol 288: 91–103, 2006 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 23. Feucht BL, Richardson AW, Hines HM. Effect of hot foments on volume of blood flow in extremities of dogs. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 30: 687–690, 1949 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 24. Garcia S, Dirat B, Tognacci T, Rochet N, Mouska X, Bonnafous S, Patouraux S, Tran A, Gual P, Le Marchand-Brustel Y, Gennero I, Gouze E. Postnatal soluble FGFR3 therapy rescues achondroplasia symptoms and restores bone growth in mice. Sci Transl Med 5: 203ra124, 2013 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 25. Garrick RA, Ryan US, Chinard FP. Water permeability of isolated endothelial cells at different temperatures. Am J Physiol 255: C311–C314, 1988 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 26. Gat-Yablonski G, Phillip M. Leptin and regulation of linear growth. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 11: 303–308, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 27. Gat-Yablonski G, Shtaif B, Phillip M. Leptin stimulates parathyroid hormone related peptide expression in the endochondral growth plate. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 20: 1215–1222, 2007 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 28. Genant HK, Bautovich GJ, Singh M, Lathrop KA, Harper PV. Bone-seeking radionucleotides: an in vivo study of factors affecting skeletal uptake. Radiology 113: 373–382, 1974 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 29. Giannoudis PV, Kanakaris NK, Einhorn TA. Interaction of bone morphogenetic proteins with cells of the osteoclast lineage: review of the existing evidence. Osteoporos Int 18: 1565–1581, 2007 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 30. Guard C, Murrish DE. Effects of temperature on the viscous behavior of blood from antarctic birds and mammals. Comp Biochem Physiol A Comp Physiol 52: 287–290, 1975 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 31. Guenther C, Pantalena-Filho L, Kingsley DM. Shaping skeletal growth by modular regulatory elements in the Bmp5 gene. PLoS Genet 4: e1000308, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 32. Halaas JL, Friedman JM. Leptin and its receptor. J Endocrinol 155: 215–216, 1997 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 33. Hammonds RG, McKay P, Winslow GA, Diefenbach-Jagger H, Grill V, Glatz J, Rodda CP, Moseley JM, Wood WI, Martin TJ. Purification and characterization of recombinant human parathyroid hormone-related protein. J Biol Chem 264: 14806–14811, 1989 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 34. Harris ED, McCroskery PA. The influence of temperature and fibril stability on degradation of cartilage collagen by rheumatoid synovial collagenase. N Engl J Med 290: 1–6, 1974 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 35. Horton WA. Molecular pathogenesis of achondroplasia. Growth Genetics Hormones 22: 49–54, 2006 [ Google Scholar ] 36. Horton WA, Degnin CR. FGFs in endochondral skeletal development. Trends Endocrinol Metab 20: 341–348, 2009 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 37. Hu MC, Qiu WR, Wang YP, Hill D, Ring BD, Scully S, Bolon B, Derose M, Luethy R, Simonet WS, Arakawa T, Danilenko DM. FGF-18, a novel member of the fibroblast growth factor family, stimulates hepatic and intestinal proliferation. Mol Cell Biol 18: 6063–6074, 1998 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 39. James CG, Stanton LA, Agoston H, Ulici V, Underhill TM, Beier F. Genome-wide analyses of gene expression during mouse endochondral ossification. PLoS One 5: e8693, 2010 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 40. Janosi JB, Firth SM, Bond JJ, Baxter RC, Delhanty PJ. N-Linked glycosylation and sialylation of the acid-labile subunit. Role in complex formation with insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-binding protein-3 and the IGFs. J Biol Chem 274: 5292–5298, 1999 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 41. Kanduser M, Sentjurc M, Miklavcic D. The temperature effect during pulse application on cell membrane fluidity and permeabilization. Bioelectrochemistry 74: 52–57, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 42. Kang JJ, Toma I, Sipos A, McCulloch F, Peti-Peterdi J. Quantitative imaging of basic functions in renal (patho)physiology. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 291: F495–F502, 2006 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 43. Karimian E, Chagin AS, Sävendahl L. Genetic regulation of the growth plate. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 2: 1–9, 2012 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 44. Kim YH, Baek SS, Choi KS, Lee SG, Park SB. The effect of cold air application on intra-articular and skin temperatures in the knee. Yonsei Med J 43: 621–626, 2002 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 45. Kume K, Satomura K, Nishisho S, Kitaoke E, Yamanouchi K, Tobiume S, Nagayama M. Potential role of leptin in endochondral ossification. J Histochem Cytochem 50: 159–169, 2002 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 46. Laederich MB, Horton WA. Achondroplasia: pathogenesis and implications for future treatment. Curr Opin Pediatr 22: 516–523, 2010 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 47. Laederich MB, Horton WA. FGFR3 targeting strategies for achondroplasia. Expert Rev Mol Med 14: e11, 2012 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 48. Laron Z. Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1): a growth hormone. Mol Pathol 54: 311–316, 2001 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 49. Le Roith D, Bondy C, Yakar S, Liu J, Butler A. The somatomedin hypothesis: 2001. Endocr Rev 22: 53–74, 2001 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 50. Leddy HA, Guilak F. Site-specific molecular diffusion in articular cartilage measured using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching. Ann Biomed Eng 31: 753–760, 2003 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 51. Lee JM, Im GI. PTHrP isoforms have differing effect on chondrogenic differentiation and hypertrophy of mesenchymal stem cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 421: 819–824, 2012 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 52. Lee MC, Bier AD, Nickisch F, Eberson CP, Ehrlich MG, Chen Q. Epiphysiodesis with infusion of stromal cell-derived factor-1 in rabbit growth plates. J Bone Joint Surg Am 89: 102–113, 2007 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 53. Legen I, Kristl A. D-Glucose triggers multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP)-mediated secretion of fluorescein across rat jejunum in vitro. Pharm Res 21: 635–640, 2004 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 54. Long F, Ornitz DM. Development of the endochondral skeleton. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 5: a008334, 2013 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 55. Lyons K, Ezaki M. Molecular regulation of limb growth. J Bone Joint Surg Am 91: 47–52, 2009 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 56. Mackie EJ, Tatarczuch L, Mirams M. The skeleton: a multi-functional complex organ. The growth plate chondrocyte and endochondral ossification. J Endocrinol 211: 109–121, 2011 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 57. Maes C. Role and regulation of vascularization processes in endochondral bones. Calcif Tissue Int 92: 307–323, 2013 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 58. Malemud CJ. Matrix metalloproteinases: role in skeletal development and growth plate disorders. Front Biosci 11: 1702–1715, 2006 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 59. Marcus BC, Gewertz BL. Measurement of endothelial permeability. Ann Vasc Surg 12: 384–390, 1998 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 60. Maroudas A. Transport of solutes through cartilage: permeability to large molecules. J Anat 122: 335–347, 1976 [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 61. Mehvar R, Robinson MA, Reynolds JM. Molecular weight dependent tissue accumulation of dextrans: in vivo studies in rats. J Pharm Sci 83: 1495–1499, 1994 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 62. Michigami T. Regulatory mechanisms for the development of growth plate cartilage. Cell Mol Life Sci 70: 4213–4221, 2013 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 63. Mobasheri A. Glucose: an energy currency and structural precursor in articular cartilage and bone with emerging roles as an extracellular signaling molecule and metabolic regulator. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 3: 153, 2012 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 64. Moeini M, Lee KB, Quinn TM. Temperature affects transport of polysaccharides and proteins in articular cartilage explants. J Biomech 45: 1916–1923, 2012 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 64a. Molecular Probes, Invitrogen Dextran Conjugates (Online). http://tools.lifetechnologies.com/content/sfs/manuals/mp01800.pdf [24 September 2013]. 65. Murray PG, Clayton PE. Endocrine control of growth. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 163C: 76–85, 2013 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 66. National Center for Biotechnology Information Calcitriol—Compound Summary (CID = 5280453). PubChem Compound (Online). http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/summary/summary.cgi?cid=5280453 [11 October 2013]. 67. National Center for Biotechnology Information Thyroxine—Compound Summary (CID = 5819). PubChem Compound (Online). http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/summary/summary.cgi?cid=5819 [11 October 2013]. 68. Nishimura N, Schaffer CB, Friedman B, Lyden PD, Kleinfeld D. Penetrating arterioles are a bottleneck in the perfusion of neocortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104: 365–370, 2007 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 69. Nishimura S, Manabe I, Nagasaki M, Seo K, Yamashita H, Hosoya Y, Ohsugi M, Tobe K, Kadowaki T, Nagai R, Sugiura S. In vivo imaging in mice reveals local cell dynamics and inflammation in obese adipose tissue. J Clin Invest 118: 710–721, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 70. Noel JF, Wright EA. The effect of environmental temperature on the growth of vertebrae in the tail of the mouse. J Embryol Exp Morphol 24: 405–410, 1970 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 71. O'Connor RD, Farach-Carson MC, Schanen NC. Genetic and epigenetic aspects of bone development. In: Bone and Development, edited by Bronner F, Farach-Carson MC, Roach HI. London: Springer-Verlag, 2010 [ Google Scholar ] 72. Oosterveld FG, Rasker JJ, Jacobs JW, Overmars HJ. The effect of local heat and cold therapy on the intraarticular and skin surface temperature of the knee. Arthritis Rheum 35: 146–151, 1992 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 73. Palenske NM, Saunders DK. Comparisons of blood viscosity between amphibians and mammals at 3°C and 38°C. J Therm Biol 27: 479–484, 2002 [ Google Scholar ] 74. Reichert IL, McCarthy ID, Hughes SP. The acute vascular response to intramedullary reaming. Microsphere estimation of blood flow in the intact ovine tibia. J Bone Joint Surg Am 77: 490–493, 1995 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 75. Rothenfluh DA, Bermudez H, O'Neil CP, Hubbell JA. Biofunctional polymer nanoparticles for intra-articular targeting and retention in cartilage. Nat Mater 7: 172–174, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 76. Schoutens A, Bergmann P, Verhas M. Bone flood flow measured by 85 Sr microspheres and bone seeker clearances in the rat. Am J Physiol 236: H1–H6, 1979 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 77. Serrat MA. Environmental temperature impact on bone and cartilage growth. Compr Physiol 4: 1–35, 2014 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 78. Serrat MA, King D, Lovejoy CO. Temperature regulates limb length in homeotherms by directly modulating cartilage growth. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105: 19347–19352, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 79. Serrat MA, Williams RM, Farnum CE. Exercise mitigates the stunting effect of cold temperature on limb elongation in mice by increasing solute delivery to the growth plate. J Appl Physiol 109: 1869–1879, 2010 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 80. Serrat MA, Williams RM, Farnum CE. Temperature alters solute transport in growth plate cartilage measured by in vivo multiphoton microscopy. J Appl Physiol 106: 2016–2025, 2009 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 81. Shi C, Wright GJ, Ex-Lubeskie CL, Bradshaw AD, Yao H. Relationship between anisotropic diffusion properties and tissue morphology in porcine TMJ disc. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 21: 625–633, 2013 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 82. Silvast TS, Jurvelin JS, Aula AS, Lammi MJ, Töyräs J. Contrast agent-enhanced computed tomography of articular cartilage: associations with tissue composition and properties. Acta Radiol 50: 78–85, 2009 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 83. Silvast TS, Jurvelin JS, Lammi MJ, Töyräs J. pQCT study on diffusion and equilibrium distribution of iodinated anionic contrast agent in human articular cartilage—associations to matrix composition and integrity. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 17: 26–32, 2009 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 84. Späth SS, Andrade AC, Chau M, Nilsson O. Local regulation of growth plate cartilage. Endocr Dev 21: 12–22, 2011 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 85. Stambaugh JE, Brighton CT. Diffusion in the various zones of the normal and rachitic growth plate. J Bone Joint Surg Am 62: 740–749, 1980 [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 86. Sundararaj SKC, Cieply RD, Gupta G, Milbrandt TA, Puleo DA. Treatment of growth plate injury using IGF-I-loaded PLGA scaffolds. J Tissue Eng Regen Med. 10.1002/term.1670, 2012 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 87. Sundén G. Some aspects of longitudinal bone growth. An experimental study of the rabbit tibia. Acta Orthop Scand Supp 103: 5–133, 1967 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 88. Torzilli PA. Effects of temperature, concentration and articular surface removal on transient solute diffusion in articular cartilage. Med Biol Eng Comput 31: S93–S98, 1993 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 89. Torzilli PA, Arduino JM, Gregory JD, Bansal M. Effect of proteoglycan removal on solute mobility in articular cartilage. J Biomech 30: 895–902, 1997 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 90. Torzilli PA, Grande DA, Arduino JM. Diffusive properties of immature cartilage. J Biomed Mater Res 40: 132–138, 1998 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 91. Tulapurkar ME, Almutairy EA, Shah NG, He JR, Puche AC, Shapiro P, Singh IS, Hasday JD. Febrile-range hyperthermia modifies endothelial and neutrophil functions to promote extravasation. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 46: 807–814, 2012 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 92. Urech DM, Feige J, Ewert S, Schlosser V, Ottiger M, Polzer K, Schett G, Lichtlen P. Anti-inflammatory and cartilage-protecting effects of an intra-articularly injected anti-TNF{alpha} single-chain Fv antibody (ESBA105) designed for local therapeutic use. Ann Rheum Dis 69: 443–449, 2010 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 93. Valentini RP, Brookhiser WT, Park J, Yang T, Briggs J, Dressler G, Holzman LB. Post-translational processing and renal expression of mouse Indian hedgehog. J Biol Chem 272: 8466–8473, 1997 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 94. van den Berg WB, van Lent PL, van de Putte LB, Zwarts WA. Electrical charge of hyaline articular cartilage: its role in the retention of anionic and cationic proteins. Clin Immunol Immunopathol 39: 187–197, 1986 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 95. Venjakob AJ, Vogt S, Stöckl K, Tisher T, Jost PJ, Thein E, Imhoff AB, Anetzberger H. Local cooling reduces regional bone blood flow. J Orthop Res 31: 1820–1827, 2013 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 96. Venturoli D, Rippe B. Ficoll and dextran vs. globular proteins as probes for testing glomerular permselectivity: effects of molecular size, shape, charge, and deformability. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 288: F605–F613, 2005 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 97. Wang L, Shao YY, Ballock RT. Leptin synergizes with thyroid hormone signaling in promoting growth plate chondrocyte proliferation and terminal differentiation in vitro. Bone 48: 1022–1027, 2011 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 98. Wang L, Shao YY, Ballock RT. Thyroid hormone-mediated growth and differentiation of growth plate chondrocytes involves IGF-1 modulation of beta-catenin signaling. J Bone Miner Res 25: 1138–1146, 2010 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 99. Williams RM, Zipfel WR, Tinsley ML, Farnum CE. Solute transport in growth plate cartilage: in vitro and in vivo. Biophys J 93: 1039–1050, 2007 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 100. Wit JM, Camacho-Hübner C. Endocrine regulation of longitudinal bone growth. Endocr Rev 21: 30–41, 2011 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 101. Yakar S, Adamo ML. Insulin-like growth factor 1 physiology: lessons from mouse models. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 41: 231–247, 2012 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 102. Zhang L, Szeri AZ. Transport of neutral solute in articular cartilage: effect of microstructure anisotropy. J Biomech 41: 430–437, 2008 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 103. Zhang P, Jiang C, Yokota H. Lengthening of mouse hind limbs with local administration of insulin-like growth factor 2. J Chin Med Assoc 75: 494–500, 2012 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 104. Zhao Q, Brauer PR, Xiao L, McGuire MH, Yee JA. Expression of parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PthrP) and its receptor (PTH1R) during the histogenesis of cartilage and bone in the chicken mandibular process. J Anat 201: 137–151, 2002 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] Articles from Journal of Applied Physiology are provided here courtesy of American Physiological Society ACTIONS View on publisher site Cite Collections Permalink PERMALINK Copy RESOURCES Similar articles Cited by other articles Links to NCBI Databases Cite Copy Download .nbib .nbib Format: AMA APA MLA NLM Add to Collections Create a new collection Add to an existing collection Name your collection * Choose a collection Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again Add Cancel Follow NCBI NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) NCBI on Facebook NCBI on LinkedIn NCBI on GitHub NCBI RSS feed Connect with NLM NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) NLM on Facebook NLM on YouTube National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 Web Policies FOIA HHS Vulnerability Disclosure Help Accessibility Careers NLM NIH HHS USA.gov Back to Top 