=== PAGE 1 ===
International Orthopaedics (SICOT) (2006) 30: 353 –356
DOI 10.1007/s00264-006-0082-2
ORIGINAL PAPER
Itay Fenichel . Zoharia Evron . Zvi Nevo
The perichondrial ring as a reservoir for precartilaginous cells.
In vivo model in young chicks ’ epiphysis
Received: 8 December 2005 / Revised: 16 December 2005 / Accepted: 13 January 2006 / Published online: 28 April 2006
# Springer-V erlag 2006
Abstract Background: The purpose of this study is to
illustrate the routes of migration of precartilaginous cells
from the perichondrial ring of LaCroix, as a potential
reservoir for growth-plate germ cells. Methods: Chondro-
cytes derived from the ring of LaCroix of young chicks ’
proximal tibia were cultured in vitro and transfected with
adenovirus vector containing the gene encoding for
Escherichia coli (beta)-galactosidase (lacZ) gene, which
allows assessment of the migratory routes of these cells.
The lacZ- transfected cells were injected back into the
perichondrial ring of LaCroix of young chicks ’proximal
tibias. Four weeks later the migration root was assessed
microscopically. Results: Injection of cells derived from
the ring of LaCroix of neonate chicks, transfected in culture
with adenoviruses containing LacZ reporter gene, allows
the assessment of migratory potential of these cells. Stained
cells were found at the outer layer of the epiphysis,
particularly in areas adjacent to the perichondrial ring.
Further longitudinal histopathological studies along the
bone axis demonstrated a condensed layer of the stained
cells arranged horizontally along parts of the physis.
Conclusion: The perichondrial ring of LaCroix represents a
potential reservoir of growth-plate germ cells in young
chicks.
Résumé Le but de cette étude est d ’étudier la circulation
des cellules souches précartilagineuses provenant de la
virole périchondrale de LaCroix considérée comme un
réservoir potentiel de ces cellules. Méthode: les chondro-
cytes provenant de la virole périchondrale de LaCroix
prélevés au niveau de l ’extrémité supérieure du tibia chez
de jeunes poulets ont été cultivés in vitro et transplantés à
l’aide d ’un adénovirus codant le gène beta galactosidase
(lacZ). Les cellules lacZ ainsi transplantées ont été
injectées dans la virole périchondrale de l ’extrémité
supérieure du tibia des mêmes poulets. Quatre semaines
après, les migrations cellulaires ont été étudiées au
microscope. Résultats: les migrations de ces cellules ont
été vérifiées sur le plan histopathologique. Conclusion: On
peut affirmer que la virole périchondrale de LaCroix est un
réservoir potentiel de cellules souches de croissance chez
les jeunes poulets.
Introduction
The embryogenesis of the germinal layer of the growth plate
is still controversial. Prenatal cartilage differs significantly
from postnatal cartilage with regard to its cellular elements.
In postnatal cartilage, it is hard to find proliferating chon-
drocytes. Some researches indicate that the origin of those
cells capable of becoming chondrocytes, and in turn the
source of growth of the long bone, is the perichondrial ring
of LaCroix, a circumferential structure in the periphery of
the epiphyseal cartilage [ 1, 2].
The reproduction rate of these cells creating the ring is
especially high, and they could represent the main source
of precartilaginous cells that migrate to the growth plate
and stimulate bone growth [ 3].
Some studies have showed that removal of the ring of
LaCroix can cause a drastic growth arrest of the limbs [4, 5].
This could be explained by the fact that cells creating the
I. Fenichel
Orthopedic Department,
Tel-Hashomer Hospital,
Tel-Aviv, Israel
Z. Evron . Z. Nevo
Department of Clinical Biochemistry,
Sackler Sch. of Medicine,
Tel-Aviv University,
Tel-Aviv, Israel
Present address:
I. Fenichel
Orthopedic Surgery, Warringal Hospital,
Melbourne, Australia
I. Fenichel ( *)
Harimon St,
P .O. Box 90, 42905 Udim, Israel
e-mail: Itay-f@smile.net.il
Tel.: +972-9-8858925
Fax: +972-9-8858926
=== PAGE 2 ===
ring have a high rate of proliferation and migration, as was
proved in in vivo biopsies. This contrasts with the
characteristic features of chondrocytes derived from artic-
ular cartilage or the growth plate.
This ring also contains a thin extension of metaphyseal
bone and circumferential collagen fibres that provide sta-
bility to the growth plate. Rodriguez and colleagues have
demonstrated the important role of the perichondrial ring in
the mechanical constraint of the growth plate, which can
induce bone formation at the level of an absent ring [ 6].
Another structure adjusted to the ring is the ossification
groove of Ranvier. This groove is a wedge-shaped collec-
tion of cells pushing into the reserve and proliferative
regions of the growth plate. It also appears to supply cells
for the reserve layer, causing mainly an expansion of the
diameter of the growth plate [ 7, 8].
The perichondrium, and other sources such as perivas-
cular stem cells, supply stem cells in pre- and postnatal life.
It is hard to follow those cells because of their low number
and because they do not produce any specific matrix. Some
antibodies are able to recognize mesenchimal precartila-
genous stem cells, but they are not widely in use [ 9].
In this study, an attempt was made to trace the route of
migration of the precartilagenous cells from the perichon-
drial ring towards the growth plate.
Materials and methods
As a source for cell culture we used the perichondrial ring of
epiphysis from the proximal tibias of two 2-week-old
Leghorn chicks. The use of animals for this study and the
protocol for procedure were approved by the local ethics
committee. Tissue was obtained under local anesthesia,
using 2 cc of 2% Lidocaine, in a sterile manner, through an
anterolateral approach to the knee. The proximal tibia was
surgically removed. The ring of LaCroix was identified as a
thin band which extends from the epiphysis toward the
diaphysis.
Fragments of the removed ring, 2 mm in size, were cul-
tured in the following way. The fragments were placed for
Fig. 1 Chondrocytes transfected with LacZ. (Stain, beta-galactosi-
dase, eosin counter-stain)
Fig. 2 Chondrocytes transfected with LacZ. (Stain, beta-galactosi-
dase, eosin counter-stain)
Fig. 3 A histological view of the perichondrial ring and the
epiphysis, 1 month after injection of marked cells. Stained cells at
the outer layer of the epiphysis, particulary in adjacent areas to the
perichondrial ring (Stain, beta-galactosidase, eosin counter-stain;
original magnification × 400)
Fig. 4 A histological view of the perichondrial ring and the
epiphysis, 1 month after injection of marked cells. Stained cells at
the outer layer of the epiphysis, particulary in adjacent areas to the
perichondrial ring (Stain, beta-galactosidase, eosin counter-stain;
original magnification × 400)
354
=== PAGE 3 ===
adhesion in plastic bottles for 20 minutes, then a MEM
medium (Biological Industries Plant Propagation Limited,
Israel) was added, containing 10% foetal calf serum
(Biological Industries), L- Glutamine 1% and antibiotics
(10 mg/ml streptomycin, 1000 U/ml penicillin and 1.25 U/ml
nystatin).
The medium was changed every 4 days for a total of
2 weeks. Gradually the cells left the tissue and adhered to
the plastic substrate until they reached confluence within 7
days. Then the cell masses were transferred to new 35 mm
TC dishes, using V ersene-Trypsin Solution 0.25% (Bio
Lab LTD Jerusalem, Israel). To the TC dishes we added a
DCCM-1 medium without serum (Biological Industries),
containing L-Glutamine 1% and antibiotics — 10 mg/ml
streptomycin, 1000 U/ml penicillin and 1.25 u/ml nystatin.
The dishes were incubated at 37° C in a humidified
atmosphere of 5% carbon dioxide and 95% air. The cells
propagated and reached confluence in 1 week. Microscopic
examinations revealed that the cells had a polygonal
morphology typical for cartilage cultures.
The cell cultures were transfected by a vector composed
of a replication-defective adenovirus construction, contain-
ing the lacZ reporter gene (10:1 viruses to cells). The virus
was added to sub-confluent 60-ml culture dishes contain-
ing 1 ml of medium, followed by incubation for 2 h at
37° C with 5% CO2 in air. The virus was then washed three
times with the medium and the cultures were maintained
for another 48 h. They were then tripsinized. The cell
pellets were prepared by centrifugation and then re-
suspended.
The suspension was prepared for injection (87 cells per ml).
Twenty ml were injected into the ring of LaCroix in a
subperichondrial location in the proximal tibias of six 4-
week-old chicks. The injection was performed in a sterile
manner, under local anesthesia, through an anterolateral
approach to the knee and after identification of the peri-
chondrial ring. The animals were kept for 4 more weeks and
then were killed.
The migration of the transfected cells was observed
histologically using a light microscope. Tissues examined
included the injected knee joint. Tissue explants were fixed
by paraformaldehyde 4% in 0.15 M phosphate buffered
saline, PH 7.4.
Hard tissues were decalcified by ethylenediamine-tetra-
acetic acid (12.5%), PH 7.0. After thoroughly rinsing in
running tap water, the samples were dehydrated by sequen-
tial alcohols. The samples then were embedded in paraffin,
forming standard blocks, which were sectioned with a
regular microtome producing 5 micrometer sections for
histological staining. The paraffin was removed by xylol.
Before staining, the slides were rehydrated by sequential
alcohols. Slides were stained by beta-galactosidase sub-
strate (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-D-galactopyranoside,
Sigma, St Louis, MO), and counterstained with eosin,
yielding a deep blue colour in the LacZ positive cells, with a
pink background.
Results
Injection of cells derived from the ring of LaCroix of
neonate chicks, transfected in culture with adenoviruses
containing the LacZ reporter gene, allows the assessment
of the migratory potential of these cells.
The chondrocytes transfected with LacZ could be easily
differentiated from the adjacent tissue by the blue colour of
their nuclei (Figs. 1 and 2).
On different histological cuts of the perichondrial ring
area, a large number of stained cells were identified. Whilst
some cells showed invasion of the lumen of small blood
vessels in this area of the ring, other stained cells were found
at the outer layer of the epiphysis, particularly in areas
adjacent to the perichondrial ring (Figs. 3 and 4). Only a
small number of stained cells were observed in the rest of
the epiphysis, close to the articular layer. So it seems that the
cells appear to migrate initially into the perichondrial ring,
and later deeper into the area around the physis. Further
longitudinal histopathological studies along the bone axis
demonstrated a condensed layer of stained cells arranged
horizontally along parts of the physis (Fig. 5). In these
sections, no marked cells were found in the epiphysis at all.
Discussion
Mature epiphysis structure differs from the foetal epiphysis.
This has been shown previously in various studies.
Buckwalter and colleagues have shown a different structure
between mature and foetal epiphysis in a bovine model;
Fig. 5 A longitudinal section through the physis and epiphysis
demonstrates the migration of the cells from the periphery
transversely through the physis. (Stain, beta-galactosidase, eosin
counter-stain; original magnification × 400)
355
=== PAGE 4 ===
longer hyaluronic acid central filaments, a greater number
of proteoglycan monomers per aggregate, and longer
proteoglycan monomer core proteins [ 10]. Another major
difference between foetal and mature epiphysis is the
distribution of the mesenchymal progenitor stem cells.
Whilst these cells are distributed all over the epiphysis in the
foetus, in the mature organized epiphysis, the mesenchymal
progenitor stem cells are from different specific reservoirs.
A common site of this reservoir is the perichondrial ring of
LaCroix.
The perichondrial ring is a circumferential ring in the
periphery of the epiphyseal cartilage. Cell cultures derived
from the ring of La Croix biopsy specimens show a high rate
of cell proliferation and cell migration in vitro. These cells
migrate to areas of bone and cartilage formation in the
subchondral bone and on either side of the growth plate. In
previous studies it was proved that operative removal of the
ring of LaCroix causes growth arrest and short stature [ 11].
In some chondrodysplastic diseases, like achondroplasia,
the perichondrium plays a major role since it contains a
large amount of the affected Fibroblast Growth Factor
Receptor-3(FGFR-3)-expressing cells [3]. Since those cells
are responsible for physical growth, the point mutation in
the FGFR-3 causes short stature.
Grade six growth-plate injuries also emphasise the impor-
tance of the perichondrium with respect to bone growth. In
these injuries the main damage is caused to the perichondrial
ring, resulting in growth arrest and angular deformities [12].
In this study we were able to demonstrate the route of
migration of the precartilaginous cells from the perichon-
drial ring towards the growth plate. These cells seem to
serve as cartilaginous precursor stem cells, playing a major
role in endochondral ossification.
References
1. Chu CR, Dounchis JS, Yoshioka M et al (1997) Osteochondral
repair using perichondrial cells. Clin Orthop 340:220 –229
2. O ’Driscoll SW, Recklies AD, Poole AR (1994) Chondrogen-
esis in periosteal explants. An organ culture model for in vitro
study. J Bone Joint Surg Am 76:1042 –1051
3. Robinson D, Hasharoni A, Nevo Z (1999) Fibroblast growth
factor receptor-3 as a marker for precartilaginous stem cells.
Clin Orthop 367 Suppl:S163 –S175
4. Long F, Linsenmayer TF (1998) Regulation of growth region
cartilage proliferation and differentiation by perichondrium.
Development 125:1067 –1073
5. Phemister DB (1993) Operative arrestment of longitudinal
growth of bones in the treatment of deformities. J Bone Joint
Surg Am 15:1 –16
6. Rodriguez JI, Delgado E, Paniagua R (1985) Changes in young
rat radius following excision of the perichondrial ring. Calcif
Tissue Int 37(6):677 –683
7. Gamble JG (1996) Development and maturation of the
neuromusculoskeletal system. In: Morrissy RT, Weinstein SL
(eds) Pediatric orthopedics. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, pp
1–24
8. Shapiro F, Holtrop ME, Glimcher MJ (1997) Organization and
cellular biology of the perichondrial ossification groove of
ranvier: a morphological study in rabbits. J Bone Joint Surg Am
59(6):703–723 Sep
9. Bruder SP , Ricalton NS, Boynton RE et al (1998) Mesenchy-
mal stem cell surface antigen SB-10 corresponds to activated
leukocyte cell adhesion molecule and is involved in osteogenic
differentiation. J Bone Miner Res 13:655 –663
10. Buckwalter JA, Rosenberg L (1983) Structural changes during
development in bovine fetal epiphyseal cartilage. Coll Relat
Res 3(6):489 –504 Nov
11. Santos-Ocampo S, Clovin JS, Chellaiah A, Ornitz DM (1996)
Expression and biological activity of mouse fibroblast growth
factor-9. J Biol Chem 271:1726 –1731
12. Koyama E, Shimazu A, Leatherman JL et al (1996) Expression
of syndecan-3 and tenscin-C: possible involvement in perios-
teum development. J Orthop Res 1:403 –412
356