=== PAGE 1 ===
Case Report
Fracture of a persistent olecranon physis in an adult
T. Enishi a,T .M a t s u u r ab,⁎,N .S u z u eb, K. Sairyo b
a Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Tokushima University Hospital, 2-50-1 Kuramoto, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan
b Department of Orthopedics, Institute of Health Biosciences, The University of Tokushima Graduate School, 2-50-1 Kuramoto, Tokushima 770-8503,
Japan
article info abstract
Article history:
Accepted 8 March 2015
A persistent olecranon physis is relatively rare; a fracture through
the persistent olecranon physis in an adult is particularly rare. Little
is known about the pathology of this disease. We report a case of a
36-year-old man presenting with right elbow pain after he had slipped
and hit his elbow, with a history of a persistent symptomatic olecranon
physis when he was a junior high school baseball player. He had been
diagnosed with a fracture through a persistent olecranon physis by an-
other doctor. Ten weeks after the injury, an iliac autograft was inserted
and internalﬁxation was achieved with Kirschner wires and aﬁgure-of-
eight tension band in our hospital. Histologically, a fracture passed
through the persistent physis cartilage and degeneration of the remnant
of the physis was observed. The remnant of the physis at the olecranon
side had not been replaced by new bone, though the physis at the
distal ulnar was nearly replaced by new bone. The patient returned to
work without experiencing pain or limitation in the range of motion
6 months after the operation. Radiographic evidence of bone union
was seen after removal of internal ﬁxation at the 13-month follow-up.
© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords:
Persistent physis
Cartilage degeneration
Olecranon fracture
Growth plate
Introduction
Reports of fracture of a persistent olecranon physis in an adult are rare[1–4], compared with those in ad-
olescence where treatment has been established[5]. Matsuura et al. reported the value of radiographic criteria
in the treatment of persistent symptomatic olecranon physis in adolescent throwing athletes [6]. Little is
known about the pathology of this disease in adults. Our review of the published literature identi ﬁed four
Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 9–12
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +81 88 633 7240; fax: +81 88 633 0178.
E-mail address: tmatsu@tokushima-u.ac.jp(T. Matsuura)
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Trauma Case Reports
journal homepage: http://www.journals.elsevier.com/
trauma-case-reports/
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcr.2015.03.001
2352-6440/© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
=== PAGE 2 ===
cases of a fracture through a persistent olecranon physis in adults[1–4], of which two had a growth plate rem-
nant evident on histology[1,2]. In one report, the fracture was presumably represented by the line of clefts in a
specimen of persistent olecranon physis[1]. Physeal separation was evident through the middle of the growth
plate rather than hypertrophic zone but typical physeal fractures tend to pass through the hypertrophic
zone [7]. Here, we present a rare case of a fracture through a persistent olecranon physis and the histological
ﬁndings.
Case report
A 36-year-old man, with a history of a persistent symptomatic olecranon physis when he was a junior high
school baseball player, felt pain in his right elbow after he had slipped and hit his elbow. He was diagnosed
with an olecranon fracture by a doctor and later consulted our clinic. Physical examination revealed tender-
ness around the olecranon physis with a limitation of elbow extension of 20°. Lateral radiographs showed a
displaced olecranon fragment with a sclerotic margin ( Fig. 1A, B). An operation was performed 10 weeks
after the injury. The fracture site was partially removed for histological examination. An iliac autograft and in-
ternal ﬁxation of the persistent physis was achieved with Kirschner wires and aﬁgure-of-eight tension band
(Fig. 1C). Six months after the operation, the patient had full range of motion and was able to return to work
Fig. 1. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the elbow (A, B). A transverse, irregular radiolucent line with a sclerotic border
was found at the proximal physis of the olecranon. After iliac autograft and internalﬁxation with tension band wiring (C). After removal
of internal ﬁxation (D).
10 T. Enishi et al. / Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 9 –12
=== PAGE 3 ===
without experiencing pain. Radiographic evidence of bone union was seen after removal of internalﬁxation at
the 13-month follow-up (Fig. 1D). All procedures followed the ethical standards of the committee on human
experimentation (institutional and national) and the Helsinki Declaration of 1964 and its later versions.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of the study.
Histological examination showed that bone trabeculae were thickened and a remnant of the growth plate
was present (Fig. 2A), consisting of mainly hyaline cartilage that showed metachromasia with toluidine blue
staining. Although the remnant of the growth plate was surrounded by new bone at the distal edge (diaphysis
side) of the fracture ( Fig. 2B), new bone was not seen at the proximal edge (olecranon side) ( Fig. 2C). The
cleavage was observed in the middle of the growth plate (indicated by black arrowheads, Fig. 2C). Chondro-
cyte columns were disorganised and the number of chondrocytes were decreased (Fig. 2D). Chondrocyte clus-
ter formations were observed at the growth plate (white arrowheads,Fig. 2D). These ﬁndings were consistent
with cartilage degeneration and fracture of the persistent olecranon physis.
Discussion
Here, we described a case of a fracture of a persistent olecranon physis in an adult with histological ﬁnd-
ings. The diagnosis of the persistent olecranon physis was made based on the patient's history and histology
ﬁndings of the operative specimen. Radiographs of persistent olecranon physis in adolescents have been well
studied and the criteria for treatment have been established by Matsuura et al.[6]. Our case was thought to be
stage II according to their criteria. All ﬁndings were consistent with a diagnosis of fracture of the persistent
olecranon physis.
Fig. 2. Specimen of the proximal bone fragment was stained with toluidine blue. (A) and H & E (C, D). The remnant of the physis
was metachromatically stained (A). Specimen of the distal bone fragment was stained with Safranin O. Chondrocytes, stained with red,
was completely surrounded by new bone, stained with green (B). Disorganised chondrocyte columns and uneven staining were observed
at the cartilage matrix (C). Black arrowheads indicate the cleft in the physis. Hypocellularity and chondrocyte clustering (white arrow-
heads) were observed at the physis (D). A, B × 40; C, D × 100.
11T. Enishi et al. / Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 9 –12
=== PAGE 4 ===
Our histological ﬁndings were consistent with those in previous reports[1–4]. The remnant of the physis
was surrounded by sclerotic bone, and new bone formation did not occur at the proximal edge of the fracture
site. In addition, we showed that degeneration of cartilage matrix was present. Enishi et al. reported the pres-
ence of cartilage degeneration in the persistent olecranon physis of an adolescent baseball player[8], which is
consistent with our ﬁnding. The olecranon fracture traversed the middle of the physis remnant. Generally,
fractures of the physis occur at the hypertrophic zone because of its mechanical weakness [7]. The lack of
chondrocyte columns and the degeneration and homogenization of the cartilage matrix might have shifted
the site of greatest mechanical weakness to the middle of the remnant of the physis.
Radiographs showed that the bone fragment was completely separated and new bone was not observed at
the edge of fracture site. On histological examination, new bone was not observed at the edge of the proximal
fragment although the remnant of the persistent olecranon physis was replaced by a bone at the edge of the
distal bone fragment. It has been reported that conservative therapy failed to heal a fracture of the persistent
olecranon physis[2]. These observations strongly suggest that an operation is necessary to treat fracture of the
persistent olecranon physis in adults [8].
The necessity of the iliac autograft in the present case remains unclear and represents a limitation of this
study. Bone union might be achieved with appropriate care even in the absence of an iliac autograft. In this
case, an iliac autograft was inserted because sclerotic change was observed at the rim of the persistent physis
and blood supply to the fracture site was therefore considered to be poor.
In conclusion, we described a rare case of fracture of the persistent olecranon physis in an adult. The
remnant of the growth plate had degenerated and was not replaced by new bone. The fracture through the
persistent olecranon physis was successfully treated with internalﬁxation plus an iliac autograft.
Funding
This study was partly supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Young Scientists (B) from the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (Grant no. 24791549). The study sponsor had no role in the
study design; collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or the decision
to submit the manuscript for publication.
Conﬂict of interest statement
All authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Shinsuke Katoh and Toshiyuki Iwame of Tokushima University Hospital for their assistance.
They have consented to be included in this section.
References
[1] S.V. Skak, Fracture of the olecranon through a persistent physis in an adult. A case report, J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 75 (1993) 272–275.
[2] M.L. Burman, F. Aljassir, L.P. Coughlin, Ganglion cyst and olecranon physis nonunion in a baseball pitcher: unique treatment after
conservative therapy fails, Phys. Sportsmed. 32 (2004) 41–44.
[3] D.H. O'Donoghue, L.S. Sell, Persistent olecranon epiphyses in adults, J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 24 (1942) 677 –680.
[4] J. Kovach II, B.E. Baker, J.F. Mosher, Fracture separation of the olecranon ossi ﬁcation center in adults, Am. J. Sports Med. 13 (1985)
105–111.
[5] W.P. Charlton, R.W. Chandler, Persistence of the olecranon physis in baseball players: results following operative management,
J. Shoulder Elbow Surg. 12 (2003) 59 –62.
[6] T. Matsuura, S. Kashiwaguchi, T. Iwase, T. Enishi, N. Yasui, The value of using radiographic criteria for the treatment of persistent
symptomatic olecranon physis in adolescent throwing athletes, Am. J. Sports Med. 38 (2010) 141 –145.
[7] R. Salter, W. Harris, Injuries involving the epiphyseal plate, J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 45 (1963) 587 –622.
[8] T. Enishi, T. Matsuura, N. Suzue, Y. Takahashi, K. Sairyo, Cartilage degeneration at symptomatic persistent olecranon physis in
adolescent baseball players, Adv. Orthop. (2014) 545438.
12 T. Enishi et al. / Trauma Case Reports 1 (2015) 9 –12