Growth plate senescence is associated with loss of DNA
methylation
Ola Nilsson, Robert D Mitchum Jr, Lenneke Schrier,
Sandra P Ferns, Kevin M Barnes, James F Troendle 1
and Jeffrey Baron
Developmental Endocrinology Branch and 1Biometry and Mathematical Statistics Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA
(Requests for offprints should be addressed to O Nilsson, National Institutes of Health, NICHD, Building CRC Room 1-3330, 10 Center Dr. MSC 1103,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1103, USA; Email: ola.nilsson @nih.gov)
Abstract
The overall body size of vertebrates is primarily deter-
mined by longitudinal bone growth at the growth plate.
With age, the growth plate undergoes programmed
senescence, causing longitudinal bone growth to slow
and eventually cease. Indirect evidence suggests that
growth plate senescence occurs because stem-like cells in
the growth plate resting zone have a ﬁnite proliferative
capacity that is gradually exhausted. Similar limits on
replication have been observed when many types of
animal cells are placed in cell culture, an e ﬀect known as
the Hayﬂick phenomenon. However, we found that the
number of population doublings of rabbit resting zone
chondrocytes in culture did not depend on the age of the
animal from which the cells were harvested, suggesting
that the mechanisms limiting replicative capacity of
growth plate chondrocytes in vivo are distinct from those
in vitro. We also observed that the level of DNA methyla-
tion in resting zone chondrocytes decreased with age
in vivo. This loss of methylation appeared to occur speciﬁ-
cally with the slow proliferation of resting zone chondro-
cytes in vivo and was not observed with the rapid
proliferation of proliferative zone chondrocytes in vivo (i.e.
the level of DNA methylation did not change from the
resting zone to the hypertrophic zone), with proliferation
of chondrocytes in vitro, or with growth of the liver in vivo.
Thus, the overall level of DNA methylation decreases
during growth plate senescence. This ﬁnding is consistent
with the hypothesis that the mechanism limiting repli-
cation of growth plate chondrocytes in vivo involves loss of
DNA methylation and, thus, loss of DNA methylation
might be a fundamental biological mechanism that limits
longitudinal bone growth in mammals, thereby determin-
ing the overall adult size of the organism.
Journal of Endocrinology (2005) 186, 241–249
Introduction
Overall body dimensions of mammals are primarily deter-
mined by growth of the skeleton, particularly longitudinal
growth of the long bones and vertebrae. Longitudinal bone
growth, in turn, results from chondrocyte proliferation in
the growth plates. With age, this proliferation slows down,
causing longitudinal bone growth to slow and eventually
stop (Walker & Kember 1972). Also with increasing age,
the growth plate undergoes structural changes including a
decrease in the height of the growth plate, a decrease in
the number of chondrocytes in the individual zones, as
well as a decrease in the size of the individual hypertrophic
chondrocytes. These functional and structural changes
appear not to be due to a systemic mechanism but,
instead, based on growth plate transplantation experiments
(Stevens et al. 1999), to a mechanism intrinsic to the
growth plate (Baron et al. 1994, Gafni et al. 2001). This
process, termed growth plate senescence, appears to be a
function, not of time per se , but rather of the number of
replications that the growth plate chondrocytes have
undergone (Baron et al. 1994, Gafni et al. 2001). Indirect
evidence suggests that stem-like cells, located in the
resting zone of the growth plate (Abad et al. 2002), have a
ﬁnite proliferative capacity which is gradually exhausted,
thus producing the growth deceleration and other
senescent changes (Weise et al. 2001).
Similar limits on replication have been observed when
many types of animal cells are placed in cell culture, an
eﬀect known as the Hayﬂick phenomenon (Hayﬂick &
Moorhead 1961). In such cell cultures, the rate of prolifer-
ation decreases until it eventually comes to an irreversible
stop (Stanulis-Praeger 1987). The stopping point is deter-
mined, not by time in culture, but by the number of cell
divisions undergone (Hayﬂick 1965, Goldstein & Singal
1974, Kaji & Matsuo 1979). Thus, the limits on replication
of cultured cells is similar to the proposed limits on repli-
cation of growth plate chondrocytesin vivo. Although it has
241
Journal of Endocrinology (2005) 186, 241–249
0022–0795/05/0186–241 /p302005 Society for Endocrinology Printed in Great Britain
DOI: 10.1677/joe.1.06016
Online version via http://www.endocrinology-journals.org
been suggested that both phenomena may involve a cell-
cycle counter, a cellular mechanism that is progressively
changed with each cell division, it is not known whether
the underlying mechanisms responsible for these two
phenomena are the same.
One mechanism that has been proposed to explain repli-
cative senescence involves epigenetic changes in methyla-
tion of genomic DNA (Wilson & Jones 1983, Holliday
1985, Young & Smith 2001). Some CG sequences in
mammalian genomic DNA are methylated on the cytosine
moiety. When DNA is replicated, the new strand is initially
not methylated. However, DNA methyltransferase 1, a
maintenance methylase, recognizes the hemimethylated
CGs and adds the missing methyl groups (Wigler et al.
1981, Stein et al. 1982). If maintenance methylation is
incomplete, methylation levels may gradually decrease with
repeated cell replication. Thus, the level of DNA methyla-
tion could serve as a cell-cycle counter. The level of DNA
methylation can then a ﬀect gene expression, in part by
altering interaction of transacting elements with the pro-
moter region and in part by altering histone modiﬁcation,
and thus chromatin structure (Eden et al. 1998, Jones &
Laird 1999). There is evidence that such epigenetic changes
may contribute to replicative senescence and terminal dif-
ferentiation in some cell types (Wilson & Jones 1983,
Fairweather et al. 1987, Young & Smith 2001). In particu-
lar, growth plate chondrocytes cultured at high density and
exposed to a demethylating agent (5-azacytidine), undergo
hypertrophic diﬀerentiation (Cheung et al. 2001. Further-
more, disruption of PASG (proliferation-associated SNF2-
like gene), PASG, which is required for normal maintain-
ance of DNA methylation, results in growth retardation and
premature aging (Sun et al. 2004). These observations raise
the possibility that the limits on replication of growth plate
chondrocytes may involve changes in DNA methylation
and other related epigenetic modiﬁcations.
We ﬁrst hypothesized that the limits on replication of
growth plate chondrocytes in vivo involve the same cellular
mechanisms as replicative senescence in vitro (the Hayﬂick
phenomenon). This hypothesis predicts that growth plate
chondrocytes taken from older animals and placed in cell
culture will undergo fewer cell divisions before under-
going replicative senescence than will chondrocytes from
younger animals. We next hypothesized that the under-
lying mechanism involves loss of DNA methylation,
which acts as a cell-cycle counter that limits proliferation
of growth plate chondrocytes in vivo and in vitro . This
hypothesis predicts that the level of DNA methylation
decreases with replication of growth plate chondrocytes
in vitro and in vivo .
Materials and Methods
Animals
New Zealand White rabbits (Covance Research Prod-
ucts, Denver, PA, USA) were maintained and used in
accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Labora-
tory Animals (National Research Council 2003). All ani-
mals received National Institutes of Health open formula
rabbit ration (NIH 32) and water ad libitum. The Animal
Care and Use Committee (National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of
Health) approved all experiments reported here. Animals
were used on gestational day 29 (fetal), and at postnatal
week 4 and 16, except for the assessment of in vivo prolifer-
ation, when fetal, 5-, and 16-week-old animals were used.
The groups were chosen in order to obtain one time-point
at rapid (fetal), one at intermediate (4–5 weeks), and one at
slow growth (16 weeks) (Masoud et al. 1986).
Assessment of in vivo proliferation
To assess in vivo proliferation in the proliferative zone, a
pregnant doe (gestational day 29), and 5- and 16-week-old
male rabbits were injected with 5-bromo-2 /p9-deoxy-
uridine (BrdU, 50 mg/kg; Sigma-Aldrich Corp., St Louis,
MO, USA) 90 min before they were killed. BrdU-labeled
cells were detected in the proximal tibial growth plate by
immunohistochemistry using BrdU in situ detection kit II
(BD Biosciences Pharmingen, San Diego, CA, USA)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions, except that
antigen-retrieval time was extended to 15 min. The
number of BrdU-labeled chondrocytes was counted in 25
columns per animal ( n=3 per age group) and averaged.
Dissection of growth plates
Rib cartilage from fetal, 4-, and 16-week-old rabbits and
distal ulnar growth plates from fetal and 4-week-old-
rabbits were stripped of soft tissue and perichondrium, and
separated from bone tissue. For dissection of the resting
zone from rib cartilage, the proliferative and hypertrophic
zones were separated from the rib cartilage by an incision
immediately medial to the perichondrial indentation that
is visible when the perichondrium has been removed, also
called the ossiﬁcation groove of Ranvier (Shapiro et al.
1977). The next 1 mm of rib cartilage was regarded as the
resting zone and processed for cell culture and assessment
of global DNA methylation. For the distal ulnae, the
perichondrium was ﬁrst removed. The metaphyseal mar-
gin of the growth plate was separated from the metaphysis
by manual pressure. The cartilaginous growth plate was
excised by an incision along its epiphyseal margin. The
resting zone was then isolated by an incision immediately
distal to the perichondrial indentation. The proliferative
and hypertrophic zones were separated by incisions made
between the distal two-thirds and the proximal one-third
of the remaining pieces. The individual zones were
processed for assessment of global DNA methylation.
Chondrocyte cell culture
For the study of replicative capacity in vitro , resting
zone cartilage from the rib growth plates of fetal ( n=5),
O NILSSON and others · DNA methylation in growth plate242
www.endocrinology-journals.orgJournal of Endocrinology (2005) 186, 241–249
4- (n=4), and 16-week-old ( n=4) male rabbits were used.
Single cell suspension of chondrocytes was obtained by
collagenase digestion of cartilage (Wroblewski & Edwall-
Arvidsson 1995). Pieces of cartilage were incubated
with 0·1 mM EDTA in phosphate-bu ﬀered saline (PBS;
pH 7·4) for 15 min at 37 /p8C followed by incubation in
0·125% trypsin (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA,
USA) for 30 min at 37 /p8C. The pieces were then minced
into smaller pieces ( <0·5 mm) using a scalpel blade and
incubated with 0·2% collagenase type 1A (Sigma-Aldrich
Corp.) in PBS (pH 7·4) in an incubator shaker at 37 /p8C.
The collagenase solution was replaced every 45 min until
the cartilage pieces had been digested into a suspension
(1–3 h). The cell suspension was ﬁltered through a 100 µm
cell strainer (BD Falcon/BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA,
USA), and washed three times in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed
Eagles’ medium (Biosource, Camarillo, CA, USA) sup-
plemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Biosource),
gentamicin (50 µg/ml; Biosource), fungizone (2 µg/ml;
Biosource), ascorbic acid (50 µg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich
Corp.), and glutamine (2 mM; Biosource). Cells were
seeded in duplicate 35 mm wells (Corning Incorporated,
Corning, NY, USA) at 1250 cells/cm 2 in the same
medium. Medium was changed three times per week and
the cells were subcultured at approximately 90% conﬂu-
ence. The number of cells was counted in ten random
ﬁelds (0·4 cm 2) three times per week using an inverted
microscope. At each split, cells were collected for assess-
ment of global DNA methylation. In order to present the
proliferation data as continuous growth curves, at each
split, the last cell count before the split was divided by the
ﬁrst cell count after the split. All cell counts following that
particular split were then multiplied by that quotient.
Histochemistry on cultured chondrocytes
For staining of phenotypic- and senescence-related
markers, chondrocytes cultured on glass chamber slides
(Nalge Nunc International, Naperville, IL, USA) were
washed in PBS, ﬁxed in 2% phosphate-bu ﬀered formalin
(pH 7·4) for 10 min, and washed three times in distilled
water.
Glycosaminoglycans For alcian blue staining of gly-
cosaminoglycans, ﬁxed cells were washed once in 3%
acetic acid and then incubated with a solution containing
0·5% alcian blue (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) in 3%
acetic acid (pH 2·5) for 30 min at room temperature.
Alkaline phosphatase Alkaline phosphatase activity
was detected by enzyme histochemistry using the
simultaneous-coupling azo dye method. Chondrocytes
grown on chamber slides were incubated for 30 min
at room temperature in a solution containing 2%
N,N-dimethylformamide (Sigma-Aldrich Corp.), 0·2 M
Tris–HCl bu ﬀer (pH 8·3), 0·005% naphthol AS-BI
phosphate (2-naphthalenecarboxamide, 7-bromo-N-(2-
methoxyphenyl)-3-(phosphonooxy), disodium salt; (Sigma-
Aldrich Corp.) and 0·1% fast red Texas red salt (Sigma-
Aldrich Corp.).
Senescence-related /afii9826-galactosidase Senescence-
related /afii9826-galactosidase staining was performed using a
procedure previously described (Dimri et al. 1995). Fresh
senescence-related /afii9826-galactosidase stain solution was
prepared by mixing 1 ml 2% 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-
indolyl /afii9826--galactoside (Sigma-Aldrich Corp.) in N,N-
dimethylformamide with 19 ml 40 mM citrate-phosphate
buﬀer (pH 6·0) containing 5 mM potassium ferrocyanide,
5 mM potassium ferricyanide, 150 mM NaCl, and 2 mM
MgCl2. Fixed chondrocytes were incubated with fresh
stain solution for 16 h at 37 /p8C.
Assessment of global DNA methylation
The methylation status at MspI restriction endonuclease
recognition sites (CCGG) was determined using a pro-
cedure described by Bestor et al. (1984) with some
modiﬁcations. DNA was extracted from pieces of the
individual zones of distal ulnar growth plates of fetal ( n=8)
and 4-week-old-rabbits ( n=9) and from rib resting zone
cartilage and liver of fetal, 4-, and 16-week-old rabbits
(n=9 per group) using the Nucleospin tissue kit
(Macherey-Nagel GmbH & Co. KG, Düren, Germany)
according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The DNA
was cleared from contaminating single- and double-
stranded RNA by incubation with RNase A (20 µg/ml,
30 min, 37 /p8C; Roche Diagnostics Corp, Indianapolis, IN,
USA) at low salt conditions (5 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8·5),
followed by a wash on a Microcon centrifugal ﬁlter device
(Microcon YM-100 centrifugal ﬁlter; Millipore, Bedford,
MA, USA). These latter steps were added to the pro-
cedure to eliminate small RNA molecules which other-
wise yielded extraneous radioactive spots on the thin layer
chromatography plate. The resulting samples of DNA
(0·5 µg) were digested with either MspI (60 U; Promega,
Madison, WI, USA) or, as a control, with its methyl-
sensitive isoschizomer HpaII (10 U; New England
Biolabs, Beverly, MA, USA) for 2 h at 37 /p8C. The
digested DNA was recovered by phenol extraction and
ethanol precipitation and labeled at the 5 /p9termini by
an exchange labeling reaction using [ /afii9828-32P]ATP
(3000 Ci/mmol; 10 µCi/sample; Amersham Biosciences
Corp., Piscataway, NJ, USA) and T4 polynucleotide
kinase (Invitrogen Corporation) according to the manu-
facturer’s instruction. Unincorporated [ /afii9828-32P]ATP was
removed using a micro Bio-Spin P-30 column (Bio-Rad).
The samples were precipitated with ethanol, dissolved in
50 mM sodium acetate (pH 5·2), and digested into single
nucleotides with nuclease P1 (100 µg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich
Corp.) at 50 /p8C for 2 h. The samples were lyophilized and
then dissolved in 7 µl distilled water. Three microliters
DNA methylation in growth plate · O NILSSON and others 243
www.endocrinology-journals.org Journal of Endocrinology (2005) 186, 241–249
of each sample were spotted onto cellulose thin-layer
chromatography plates (EM Science, Gibbstown, NJ,
USA), and chromatography was performed in isobutyric
acid–NH4OH–water (66:20:1) for 48 h. The radioactive
spots that correlated to methylated and unmethylated
deoxycytidine 5/p9-monophosphate (dCMP) (Fig. 4A) were
quantiﬁed using a Phosphorimager (Storm 860 Imager;
Amersham Biosciences).
Statistics
Data are expressed as means /p5S.E.M. P values from
Kruskal–Wallis and repeated measures model are pre-
sented in the Results section, whereas the P values from
pairwise comparisons are shown in the Figures. The
percent of DNA methylation was calculated as 100
times the radioactivity in the methyl-deoxycytidine 5 /p9-
monophosphate (methyl-dCMP) spot divided by the sum
of the radioactivity in the methyl-dCMP spot and the
dCMP spot (Fig. 4A).
For studies of replicative senescence in cultured
chondrocytes, the e ﬀect of donor age on the maximal
number of population doublings was evaluated by a
Kruskal–Wallis test.
The e ﬀect of age on the level of DNA methylation in
the resting zone of rib growth plate cartilage and liver
was evaluated using a Kruskal–Wallis test followed by
Wilcoxon rank-sum tests for pairwise comparisons. The
P values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using a
step-down Bonferroni method with logical constraints.
The overall e ﬀects of age and zone on DNA methyla-
tion in the distal ulnar growth plate were evaluated by
two-way repeated measures ANOVA, followed by t-tests
corrected for multiple comparison using stepwise permuta-
tion tests in order to evaluate changes in individual zones.
The eﬀect of age and population doublings on the level
of DNA methylation in cultured chondrocytes was tested
by ﬁtting a repeated measures model. For age, the model
was repeated measures ANOVA, and for number of
population doublings it was a repeated measures linear
model.
Results
Growth plate chondrocyte proliferation in vivo
To determine whether chondrocyte proliferation changes
with age in rabbits, proliferation was assessed in the
proliferative zone by BrdU labeling. The number of
BrdU-labeled cells declined approximately 3-fold from
fetal to 5-week-old rabbits ( P<0·001), and approximately
another 2·5-fold from 5- to 16-week-old animals
(P=0·002; Fig. 1).
Replicative senescence of resting zone chondrocytes in vitro
We ﬁrst tested the prediction that cultured growth plate
chondrocytes from older animals will undergo fewer cell
divisions before undergoing replicative senescence than
will chondrocytes from younger animals. Resting zone
chondrocytes extracted from fetal, 4-, and 16-week-old
male rabbits proliferated for approximately 50 days and
underwent three passages (with increasing intervals) before
reaching senescence (Fig. 2). During this time, chondro-
cytes from animals of di ﬀerent ages underwent a similar
number of population doublings (13·1 /p51·1 vs 14·6 /p50·6
vs 14·3 /p50·8; fetal vs 4 weeks vs 16 weeks respectively,
P=0·36). Chondrocytes in primary culture were small,
had a round or polygonal shape, and stained for alcian blue
and alkaline phosphatase activity, but not for senescence
related /afii9826-galactosidase (Fig. 3A–C). In contrast, chondro-
cytes that were becoming senescent were larger, only
stained faintly or not at all for alcian blue and alkaline
phosphatase activity, but showed an increased senescence-
related /afii9826-galactosidase activity (Fig. 3D–F).
Eﬀect of age on global DNA methylation in growth plate
cartilage and liver
To test the prediction that DNA methylation decreases
with replication of growth plate chondrocytes in vivo, we
measured the level of DNA methylation in growth plate
cartilage from animals of di ﬀerent ages. The level of global
DNA methylation decreased with age in the resting zone
of rib growth plates from fetal, 4-, and 16-week-old rabbits
(P=0·004; Fig. 4B). DNA methylation also decreased
with age in all three zones of the distal ulnar growth plates
of fetal and 4-week-old rabbits ( P<0·001; Fig. 4C).
Within each age, there was no signiﬁcant di ﬀerence
between the individual zones of the ulnar growth plate. To
determine whether the decline in DNA methylation
occurred in a tissue that retains its ability to proliferate, we
Figure 1 Chondrocyte proliferation in the proliferative zone in
vivo. Fetal, 5-, and 16-week-old rabbits ( n=3 per age group) were
treated with BrdU 90 min before they were killed and
BrdU-labeled cells were detected by immunohistochemistry. The
number of BrdU-labeled chondrocytes per column decreased with
age. P<0·001 by ANOVA.
O NILSSON and others · DNA methylation in growth plate244
www.endocrinology-journals.orgJournal of Endocrinology (2005) 186, 241–249
also assessed the level of DNA methylation in the liver. In
contrast to the age-dependent decrease seen in growth
plate cartilage, the level of DNA methylation in the liver
increased from fetal to 4-, and 16-week-old animals
(P<0·001; Fig. 4D).
Eﬀect of in vitro replication on global DNA methylation
To determine whether DNA methylation also decreases
with replication of growth plate chondrocytes in vitro , the
level of DNA methylation was assessed in resting zone
chondrocytes derived from rabbits at di ﬀerent ages and
then cultured for various times (Fig. 5). In contrast to the
decrease of DNA methylation that was detected in vivo ,
the level of global DNA methylation in cultured resting
zone chondrocytes showed a small but signiﬁcant increase
with each population doubling (percent methylated
dCMP=62·28+0·21 /p2number of population doublings,
P=0·012 (Fig. 5)) from population doubling four through-
out replicative senescence and did not appear to be
dependent on donor age ( P=0·068).
Discussion
When cultured ex vivo, resting zone chondrocytes initially
proliferated but then over time the cumulative number of
cells reached a plateau. Thus, resting zone chondrocytes,
like many other cell types cultured ex vivo , undergo the
Hayﬂick phenomenon. These chondrocytes underwent
approximately 14 population doublings before reaching
this plateau. This number is greater than that observed for
articular chondrocytes from adult rabbits (eight to ten
population doublings) but less than that observed for
articular chondrocytes from young adult humans (35–40
population doublings) (Evans & Georgescu 1983). When
the number of cultured resting zone chondrocytes was
approaching this maximum, the cells expressed
/afii9826-galactosidase, a characteristic typical of cells that have
undergone replicative senescence (Dimri et al. 1995).
Growth plate chondrocytes also appear to have a limited
proliferative capacity in vivo . As the animal ages, prolifer-
ation of growth plate chondrocytes slows and ﬁnally stops
(Weise et al. 2001). In the current study, the proliferation
rate of proliferative zone chondrocytes declined approxi-
mately 7-fold between 0 and 16 weeks of age. Previous
studies suggest that proliferation in vivo is limited by
number of cell divisions, not by time per se (Gafni et al.
2001), and thus the limited proliferation of growth plate
chondrocytes in vivo resembles the Hayﬂick phenomenon.
We therefore hypothesized that the same mechanisms
were responsible for the two phenomena. However, our
data did not support that hypothesis. The number of
population doublings of resting zone chondrocytes in
culture did not depend on the age of the animal from
which the cells were harvested. Thus, previous prolifer-
ation in vivo had no e ﬀect on subsequent proliferation
in vitro. This ﬁnding suggests that the mechanisms limiting
replicative capacity of growth plate chondrocytes in vivo
are distinct from those responsible for limiting replication
in vitro. We speculate that the mechanism responsible for
limiting proliferation in vivo may require cell–cell and/or
cell–matrix interactions that are lost in vitro. As a result, the
cultured cells may continue to proliferate until they reach
a second stopping point in vitro , the Hayﬂick limit.
Other studies comparing the replicative potential of
cells from adult donors at various ages have in some cases
demonstrated a negative correlation between donor age
and in vitro replicative capacity (Evans & Georgescu 1983,
Cristofalo & Pignolo 1993), suggesting that the in vitro
replicative capacity of several cell types decreases during
aging. However, these previous studies typically involved
animals well past the time at which adult body size is
attained and thus these previous ﬁndings may reﬂect the
degenerative aspects of aging that occur in the latter part of
the lifespan, whereas our ﬁndings may reﬂect the devel-
opmental aspects of aging that occur in the early part of the
lifespan. Furthermore, this reported decline in replicative
capacity with age has been questioned (Cristofalo et al.
1998).
In our study, we assessed changes in cell numbers over
time. This change in cell number could be a ﬀected both
by proliferation and by cell death, including apoptosis.
Figure 2 Cumulative cell numbers of cultured resting zone
chondrocytes. Chondrocytes extracted from the resting zone
cartilage of ribs from fetal, 4-, and 16-week-old rabbits were
cultured and the number of cells was counted in ten random
ﬁelds per well three times per week. The growth curves were
modiﬁed in order to make them continuous: at each split, the last
cell count before the split was divided by the ﬁrst cell count after
the split. All cell counts after the split were multiplied by the
quotient of the two cell numbers. Resting zone chondrocytes from
animals of different ages underwent a similar number of
population doublings.
DNA methylation in growth plate · O NILSSON and others 245
www.endocrinology-journals.org Journal of Endocrinology (2005) 186, 241–249
In vivo , the decline in proliferation largely explains the
decline in growth rate with age (Walker & Kember 1972),
but a decline in cell hypertrophy, matrix production, and
possibly an increase in apoptosis may also contribute to the
decrease in growth rate (Walker & Kember 1972, Chrysis
et al. 2002).
Proliferation in vitro and in vivo might be limited by
cell-division counters, mechanisms that are progressively
modiﬁed by each cell division (Campisi 1997). Telomere
erosion may serve as one such counter that contributes to
replicative senescence in vitro and/or to crisis, a later
growth-arrest point that cultured cells reach if senescence
is bypassed. In human articular chondrocytes, average
telomere length decreases with donor age (Martin &
Buckwalter 2001). However, forced expression of the
catalytic portion of telomerase does not increase their
in vitro life span (Martin et al. 2002). For growth plate
chondrocytes in vivo , three lines of evidence suggest that
telomere shortening is not the primary cell-division
counter causing replicative senescence. First, telomere
length varies widely among di ﬀerent strains of mice with
similar skeletal sizes (Hemann & Greider 2000). Indeed,
some strains of mice have far greater telomere lengths than
humans. Thus, telomere length does not correlate with
skeletal size. Secondly, functional ablation of telomerase in
mice leads to progressive shortening of telomere length in
subsequent generations of the mice but has little e ﬀect
on skeletal size (Blasco et al. 1997). Thirdly, telomere
length does not decrease signiﬁcantly with growth plate
senescence in mice (Nwosu et al. 2005).
We hypothesized that the resting zone chondrocytes
undergo a progressive loss of DNA methylation with each
cell division and that this loss of methylation serves as a
cell-cycle counter that underlies growth plate senescence
and limits proliferation. This loss of DNA methylation
could occur as these resting zone chondrocytes gradually
replicate if there is incomplete maintenance methylation of
the newly synthesized strand of DNA. Consistent with this
hypothesis, we found that growth plate senescence is
associated with a loss of DNA methylation in rib resting
zone chondrocytes. Loss of DNA methylation was also
observed in the resting zone chondrocytes of the distal
ulna. Furthermore, in the distal ulna, a similar loss of
methylation with age was observed in the proliferative and
hypertrophic zone chondrocytes which are thought to be
progeny of the resting zone chondrocytes (Abad et al.
2002). However, within each age, there was no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in the level of DNA methylation between the
Figure 3 Phenotype of cultured resting zone chondrocytes during replicative senescence. Representative microphotographs of fetal
resting zone chondrocytes at population doublings (A–C) four and (D–E) ten stained with alcian blue stain (A and D), and for alkaline
phosphatase (B and E) and senescence related /afii9826-galactosidase activity (C and F). Chondrocytes cultured for extended periods of time
exhibited decreased staining for alcian blue and alkaline phosphatase activity, but an up-regulation of senescence related /afii9826-galactosidase
activity. Bar represents 50 /afii9839m.
O NILSSON and others · DNA methylation in growth plate246
www.endocrinology-journals.orgJournal of Endocrinology (2005) 186, 241–249
diﬀerent zones of the growth plate. Therefore, loss of
methylation appears to occur speciﬁcally during repli-
cation of resting zone chondrocytes but not during the
more rapid proliferation of proliferative zone chondrocytes.
Thus there may be complete maintenance methylation in
the proliferative zone, but not in the resting zone. This
ﬁnding suggests that loss of methylation might be respon-
sible for the temporal limits that cause chondrocyte repli-
cation to slow with age but not the spatial limits that cause
chondrocyte proliferation to slow as the cells descend
farther down the chondrocyte columns. The spatial limi-
tation on proliferation may not be controlled by a cell-
cycle counter, but instead it may be controlled by a
chemical gradient, e.g. parathyroid hormone-related
protein (Chung et al. 2001).
The level of DNA methylation did not decrease during
in vitro replication, again suggesting that loss of DNA
methylation is not an obligate consequence of chondrocyte
proliferation, but rather a speciﬁc property of proliferation
of resting zone chondrocytes in vivo. This constant level of
methylation in vitro also suggests that maintenance methy-
lases were upregulated when the resting zone chondro-
cytes were placed in cell culture, either because of loss of
cell–cell or cell–matrix interactions or because of factors
present in culture medium, or other conditions in vitro .
This ﬁnding is also consistent with our previous inference
that the mechanisms limiting replication of growth plate
chondrocytes in vitro diﬀer from those in vivo .
To determine whether loss of DNA methylation
occurred with age in tissues other than the growth plate
Figure 4 Age-dependent changes in DNA methylation in growth plate cartilage and liver. (A) Labeled
deoxynuclotides from CCGG sites were produced by digestion of rabbit DNA with the restriction
endonuclease MspI or, as a control, its methyl-sensitive isoschizomer HpaII, 5 /p9end labeling, nuclease P1
digestion, and thin-layer chromatography. The level of DNA methylation was calculated as 100 times the
radioactivity in the methyl-dCMP spot divided by the sum of the radioactivity in the methyl-dCMP spot
and the dCMP spot. (B) DNA methylation decreased with age in rib resting zone cartilage and in the
individual zones of the growth plate of the (C) distal ulna, but not in (D) the liver. (B and D) Wilcoxon
rank-sum tests adjusted for multiple comparison; (C) t-tests corrected for multiple comparison.
DNA methylation in growth plate · O NILSSON and others 247
www.endocrinology-journals.org Journal of Endocrinology (2005) 186, 241–249
in vivo, we measured methylation levels in the rabbit liver.
In liver, the level of methylation actually increased during
the ﬁrst 4 weeks of life and then changed little during the
next 12 weeks of life. Thus, loss of methylation with age
was not observed in the liver and therefore appears to
have some tissue speciﬁcity. If loss of DNA methylation
represents a mechanism leading to replicative senescence
during the early part of the lifespan in some cell types, the
absence of this mechanism in hepatic cells might help
explain the ability of the adult liver to regenerate after
partial hepatectomy.
Previous studies also support the hypothesis that growth
plate chondrocyte proliferative capacity may be regulated
by DNA methylation. Growth plate chondrocytes cul-
tured at high density and brieﬂy exposed to 5-azacytidine,
a demethylating agent, di ﬀerentiate and start expressing
markers speciﬁc for hypertrophic chondrocytes (Cheung
et al. 2001). In mice, disruption of PASG (proliferation
associated SNF2-like gene), causes a loss of genomic DNA
methylation. These mice exhibit general growth retarda-
tion and evidence of premature cellular senescence in
many tissues. Longitudinal bone growth is impaired,
although it is not clear whether this e ﬀect on skeletal
growth is a direct e ﬀect of DNA hypomethylation on
growth plate chondrocytes or an indirect e ﬀect related to
systemic disease (Sun et al. 2004). The method used in this
study measures methylation at CCGG sequences which
might not be representative of all possible CG sites.
In summary, our ﬁndings suggest that the mechanisms
responsible for limiting proliferation of growth plate
chondrocytes in vivo are distinct from the mechanisms
limiting proliferation in vitro (the Hayﬂick phenomenon).
We also observed that the level of DNA methylation in
resting zone chondrocytes decreased with age in vivo. This
loss of methylation appeared to occur speciﬁcally with the
slow proliferation of resting zone chondrocytes in vivo.
Methylation levels did not decrease during proliferation
of chondrocytes in vitro, with the rapid proliferation of
proliferative zone chondrocytes in vivo (i.e. the level of
DNA methylation did not change from the resting zone to
the hypertrophic zone) or with growth of the liver in vivo.
Taken together our ﬁndings are consistent with the
hypothesis that the mechanism limiting replication of
growth plate chondrocytes in vivo involves speciﬁc loss of
DNA methylation in the stem-like cells of the resting
zone. However, additional studies are needed to deter-
mine whether this association between loss of methylation
and growth plate senescence represents a direct causal link.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Swedish MRC (K2003–
72PK-15191–01A), the Swedish Medical Society, Stiftelsen
BLANCEFLOR Boncompagni-Ludovisi, född Bildt,
Sällskapet Barnavård, Stiftelsen Frimurare Barnhuset i
Stockholm, and Wera Ekströms Stiftelse. J B is a
Commissioned Oﬃcer in the United States Public Health
Service. The authors declare that there is no conﬂict of
interest that would prejudice the impartiality of this
scientiﬁc work.
References
Abad V, Meyers JL, Weise M, Gafni RI, Barnes KM, Nilsson O,
Bacher JD & Baron J 2002 The role of the resting zone in growth
plate chondrogenesis. Endocrinology 143 1851–1857.
Baron J, Klein KO, Colli MJ, Yanovski JA, Novosad JA, Bacher JD &
Cutler GB Jr 1994 Catch-up growth after glucocorticoid excess: a
mechanism intrinsic to the growth plate. Endocrinology 135
1367–1371.
Bestor TH, Hellewell SB & Ingram VM 1984 Di ﬀerentiation of two
mouse cell lines is associated with hypomethylation of their
genomes. Molecular and Cellular Biology 4 1800–1806.
Blasco MA, Lee HW, Hande MP, Samper E, Lansdorp PM, DePinho
RA & Greider CW 1997 Telomere shortening and tumor
formation by mouse cells lacking telomerase RNA. Cell 91 25–34.
Campisi J 1997 The biology of replicative senescence. European Journal
of Cancer 33 703–709.
Cheung JO, Hillarby MC, Ayad S, Hoyland JA, Jones CJ, Denton J,
Thomas JT, Wallis GA & Grant ME 2001 A novel cell culture
model of chondrocyte di ﬀerentiation during mammalian
endochondral ossiﬁcation. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research 16
309–318.
Chrysis D, Nilsson O, Ritzen EM & Savendahl L 2002 Apoptosis is
developmentally regulated in rat growth plate. Endocrine 18
271–278.
Chung UI, Schipani E, McMahon AP & Kronenberg HM 2001
Indian hedgehog couples chondrogenesis to osteogenesis in
endochondral bone development. Journal of Clinical Investigation 107
295–304.
Cristofalo VJ & Pignolo RJ 1993 Replicative senescence of human
ﬁbroblast-like cells in culture. Physiological Reviews 73 617–638.
Figure 5 DNA methylation of cultured resting zone chondrocytes
during replicative senescence. The level of DNA methylation at
MspI sites was assessed in cultured chondrocytes extracted from
rib resting zone cartilage of fetal, 4-, and 16-week-old rabbits. The
level of DNA methylation showed a small but signiﬁcant increase
with each population doubling: methylated dCMP =62·28+0·21/p2
number of population doublings. P=0·012 by a repeated
measures linear model.
O NILSSON and others · DNA methylation in growth plate248
www.endocrinology-journals.orgJournal of Endocrinology (2005) 186, 241–249
Cristofalo VJ, Allen RG, Pignolo RJ, Martin BG & Beck JC 1998
Relationship between donor age and the replicative lifespan of
human cells in culture: a reevaluation. PNAS 95 10614–10619.
Dimri GP, Lee X, Basile G, Acosta M, Scott G, Roskelley C,
Medrano EE, Linskens M, Rubelj I, Pereira-Smith O et al. 1995 A
biomarker that identiﬁes senescent human cells in culture and in
aging skin in vivo . PNAS 92 9363–9367.
Eden S, Hashimshony T, Keshet I, Cedar H & Thorne AW 1998
DNA methylation models histone acetylation. Nature 394 842.
Evans CH & Georgescu HI 1983 Observations on the senescence of
cells derived from articular cartilage. Mechanisms of Ageing and
Development 22 179–191.
Fairweather DS, Fox M & Margison GP 1987 The in vitro lifespan of
MRC-5 cells is shortened by 5-azacytidine-induced demethylation.
Experimental Cell Research 168 153–159.
Gafni RI, Weise M, Robrecht DT, Meyers JL, Barnes KM, De Levi
S & Baron J 2001 Catch-up growth is associated with delayed
senescence of the growth plate in rabbits. Pediatric Research 50
618–623.
Goldstein S & Singal DP 1974 Senescence of cultured human
ﬁbroblasts: mitotic versus metabolic time. Experimental Cell Research
88 359–364.
Hayﬂick L 1965 The limited in vitro lifetime of human diploid cell
strains. Experimental Cell Research 37 614–636.
H a y ﬂ i c kL&M o o r h e a dP1 9 6 1T h eserial cultivation of human
diploid cell strains. Experimental Cell Research 25 585–621.
Hemann MT & Greider CW 2000 Wild-derived inbred mouse strains
have short telomeres. Nucleic Acids Research 28 4474–4478.
Holliday R 1985 The signiﬁcance of DNA methylation in cellular
aging. Basic Life Science 35 269–283.
Jones PA & Laird PW 1999 Cancer epigenetics comes of age. Nature
Genetics 21 163–167.
K a j iK&M atsuo M 1979 Doubling potential and calendar time of
human diploid cells in vitro . Experimental Gerontology 14 329–334.
Martin JA & Buckwalter JA 2001 Telomere erosion and senescence in
human articular cartilage chondrocytes. Journals of Gerontology: Series
A Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences 56 B172-B179.
Martin JA, Mitchell CJ, Klingelhutz AJ & Buckwalter JA 2002 E ﬀects
of telomerase and viral oncogene expression on the in vitro growth
of human chondrocytes. Journals of Gerontology: Series A Biological
Sciences and Medical Sciences 57 B48-B53.
Masoud I, Shapiro F, Ken tR&M oses A 1986 A longitudinal study
of the growth of the New Zealand white rabbit: cumulative and
biweekly incremental growth rates for body length, body weight,
femoral length, and tibial length. Journal of Orthopedic Research 4
221–231.
National Research Council 2003 Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals . Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Nwosu BU, Nilsson O, Mitchum RD Jr, Coco M, Barnes KM &
Baron J 2005 Lack of telomere shortening with age in mouse
resting-zone chondrocytes. Hormonal Research 63 125–128.
Shapiro F, Holtrop ME & Glimcher MJ 1977 Organization and
cellular biology of the perichondrial ossiﬁcation groove of ranvier: a
morphological study in rabbits. Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery 59
703–723.
Stanulis-Praeger BM 1987 Cellular senescence revisited: a review.
Mechanisms of Ageing and Development 38 1–48.
Stein R, Gruenbaum Y, Pollack Y, Razi nA&C edar H 1982 Clonal
inheritance of the pattern of DNA methylation in mouse cells.
PNAS 79 61–65.
Stevens DG, Boyer MI & Bowen CV 1999 Transplantation of
epiphyseal plate allografts between animals of di ﬀerent ages. Journal
of Pediatric Orthopedics 19 398–403.
Sun LQ, Lee DW, Zhang Q, Xiao W, Raabe EH, Meeker A, Miao
D, Huso DL & Arceci RJ 2004 Growth retardation and premature
aging phenotypes in mice with disruption of the SNF2-like gene,
PASG. Genes and Development 18 1035–1046.
Walker KV & Kember NF 1972 Cell kinetics of growth cartilage in
the rat tibia. II. Measurements during ageing. Cell and Tissue
Kinetics 5 409–419.
Weise M, De-Levi S, Barnes KM, Gafni RI, Aba dV&B a r o nJ2 0 0 1
Eﬀects of estrogen on growth plate senescence and epiphyseal
fusion. PNAS 98 6871–6876.
Wigler M, Lev yD&P e r u c h oM1 9 8 1T h es o matic replication of
DNA methylation. Cell 24 33–40.
Wilson VL & Jones PA 1983 DNA methylation decreases in aging but
not in immortal cells. Science 220 1055–1057.
WroblewskiJ&E d w all-Arvidsson C 1995 Inhibitory e ﬀects of basic
ﬁbroblast growth factor on chondrocyte di ﬀerentiation. Journal of
Bone and Mineral Research 10 735–742.
Young JI & Smith JR 2001 DNA methyltransferase inhibition in
normal human ﬁbroblasts induces a p21-dependent cell cycle
withdrawal. Journal of Biological Chemistry 276 19610–19616.
Received 17 March 2005
Accepted 6 April 2005
Made available online as an Accepted Preprint
19 April 2005
DNA methylation in growth plate · O NILSSON and others 249
www.endocrinology-journals.org Journal of Endocrinology (2005) 186, 241–249