
=========== PAGE 1 ===========
J Bone Miner Metab (2002) 20:83–90
© Springer-Verlag 2002  
Human PTH (1–34) induces longitudinal bone growth in rats
Taishi Ogawa, Hiroshi Yamagiwa, Tadashi Hayami, Zhang Liu, Kuan-Yu Huang, Kunihiko Tokunaga,
Takehiro Murai, and Naoto Endo
Division of Orthopedic Surgery, Department of Regenerative and Transplant Medicine, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and
Dental Sciences, 1-757 Asahimachi-dori, Niigata 951-8510, Japan
Introduction
Environmental and systemic factors acting on the
epiphyseal growth plate determine the growth and
morphogenesis of long bone via the process of endo-
chondral bone formation [1–6]. In this process, small
cells in the reserve zone of the growth plate proliferate
and form columns of ﬂattened cells, resulting in hyper-
trophy. After calciﬁcation of the matrix occurs, cell
columns are invaded by the vascular system, and the
calciﬁed matrix between columns becomes the ﬁrst site
of bone deposition [2].
The tibial growth plates of rats submitted to hindlimb
unloading exhibit changes that resemble those induced
by spaceﬂight [7]. These changes consist of a decrease
in growth plate thickness, associated with alterations in
chondrocyte organization, and a decreased number of
cells in the proliferative zone [3]. These reports suggest
that the removal of mechanical loading induces alter-
ations in chondrocyte proliferation during the matura-
tion of growth plate cartilage in growing animals.
Several growth factors inﬂuence the proliferation
and maturation of chondrocytes in the epiphyseal
growth plate [8–10]. Zerath et al. [8] suggested that
the systemic administration of recombinant human
transforming growth factor (rhTGF)-2 would largely
prevent the reduction of chondrocyte proliferation
in the proliferative zone and the reduced epiphyseal
growth plate growth induced by unloading in rats. In
addition, Reinecke et al. [9] indicated that the admini-
stration of growth hormone prevented the reduction
in the height of the growth plate caused by hypophy-
sectomy in rats. They have also suggested that insulin-
like growth factor-I, produced by all chondrocyte
layers under the inﬂuence of growth hormone, medi-
ates chondrocyte maturation and longitudinal bone
growth in an autocrine/paracrine manner. It has been
reported that the systemic administration of growth
factor prevents the reduction of the epiphyseal growth
Abstract
The growth plate is a specialized structure that is
responsible for longitudinal bone growth (LGR). Growth
plate organization is altered with loading in rats. Parathyroid
hormone (PTH) is known to induce mitogenic effect on
chondrocytes in vitro. Type I PTH/PTH related peptide (rP)
receptor is expressed in growth plate cartilage in rats. We
therefore investigated the effect of PTH administration on the
organization and longitudinal growth rate of the growth plate
in rats. We also investigated the effect of PTH on the changes
induced by unloading in the organization and growth of the
growth plate. Thirty 6-week-old and 30 15-week-old male
Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly assigned to ﬁve groups
(n  6 per group), i.e., basal controls, control (i.e., normally
loaded), PTH-treated control (i.e., PTH-treated under normal
loading), unloaded, and PTH-treated under unloading.
PTH-treated animals received human PTH (1–34) at a dose
of 80µg/kg per day ﬁve times per week for 3 weeks, for the
duration of unloading. In young loaded rats treated with the
systemic administration of PTH, growth plate thickness, chon-
drocyte number, and LGR were increased in the proximal
tibiae compared with ﬁndings in young loaded rats without
PTH administration. Hindlimb unloading induced a reduction
in growth plate thickness, chondrocyte number, and LGR. In
young rats, systemic administration of PTH partly prevented
these changes induced by unloading. These preventive effects
of PTH were observed only in young rats; not in adult rats.
These results show that the systemic administration of PTH
stimulates longitudinal bone growth, and diminishes the re-
duction in growth plate growth induced by unloading in young
rats.
Key words
PTH · growth plate · suspension by the tail ·
longitudinal bone growth
Offprint requests to: T. Ogawa
Received: August 9, 2001 / Accepted: November 9, 2001

=========== PAGE 2 ===========
84
T. Ogawa et al.: Human PTH induces longitudinal bone growth in rats
plate growth induced by mechanical or hormonal
factors.
Type I parathyroid hormone (PTH)/PTH-related
peptide (PTHrP) receptor was expressed in growth
plate tissue in the rat after birth, and PTH was shown
to bind speciﬁcally to the receptor in growth plate carti-
lage [11,12]. Recent genetic analyses of mutant and
transgenic animals suggests that PTH/PTHrP signaling
plays a crucial role in endochondral bone formation
[13–22]. PTHrP-depleted mice showed extensive abnor-
malities of endochondral bone formation [13,14]. Simi-
lar abnormalities were caused by the depletion of the
PTH/PTHrP receptor gene [23]. In Jansen-type meta-
physeal chondrodysplasia, the expression of a constitu-
tively active mutant PTH/PTHrP receptor caused the
abnormal endochondral bone formation in this rare
form of short-term dwarﬁsm [24]. In addition, in-vitro
experiments have suggested that growth plate chondro-
cytes demonstrated a marked mitogenic response to
PTH. From these reports, it seems that PTH administra-
tion may have a positive effect on epiphyseal growth
plate growth. PTH also affected matrix production by
growth plate chondrocytes, causing the stimulation of
proteoglycan synthesis [25]; in this report, Harvey et al.
[25] suggest that the effect of PTH on proteoglycan
synthesis was mediated through regulation of the
insulin-like growth factor-I pathway.
In the present study, we found that intermittent PTH
treatment enhanced proliferation in the epiphyseal
growth plate in the proximal tibia of the rat, resulting in
increased longitudinal growth of the tibia; this treat-
ment also diminished the reduction in growth plate
growth induced by unloading in young rats.
Materials and methods
Animals
Thirty 6-week-old male Sprague-Dawley rats (weight,
105–120g; purchased from Charles River Breeding
Laboratories, Tokyo, Japan) were randomly assigned
to ﬁve groups (n  6 per group): group (G) I, basal
controls; G II, control (i.e., normally loaded); G III,
PTH-treated control (i.e., PTH-treated under normal
loading); G IV, unloaded; G and V, PTH-treated under
unloading. Thirty 15-week-old male Sprague-Dawley
rats (weight, 315–330g, purchased from Charles River
Breeding Laboratories) were also randomly assigned to
one of ﬁve groups (n  6 per group): G VI, basal con-
trols; G VII, control (i.e., normally loaded); G VIII,
PTH-treated control (i.e., PTH-treated under normal
loading); G IX, unloaded; and G X, PTH-treated under
unloading. The unloaded animals (G IV and V young
rats and, G IX and X adult rats) were suspended by the
tail according to a method described previously [26,27],
to ensure that their hindlimbs were non-weight-bearing;
only the forelimbs were allowed to touch the ground.
The suspension device was carefully attached to the tail
of each suspended animal with adhesive tape. Each un-
loaded animal was housed in a specially designed indi-
vidual cage equipped with a dual pulley system that
allowed the animal to move freely in all horizontal
directions. This method of tail-suspension allowed the
animals to have free access to food and water in the cage
by using their forelimbs. Normally loaded animals were
housed in individual cages and were given access to
food and water. All animals were maintained on a 12:12
light-dark cycle.
All the procedures used in this study were reviewed
and approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee
of Niigata University.
Treatments
PTH-treated animals (G III, V, VIII, and X) received
human PTH (1–34) (kindly provided by Asahi Chemi-
cal Industry, Shizuoka, Japan), dissolved in a vehicle
consisting of 4mM HCL with 0.1% bovine serum albu-
min; this was administered subcutaneously at the dose
of 80µg/kg body weight (bw) per day, ﬁve times per
week, for 3 weeks (this also being the duration of the
tail suspension). The rats were weighed weekly and the
dose of PTH was adjusted to the actual body weight.
Untreated animals (G II, IV, VII, and IX) were injected
with the same volume of vehicle alone ﬁve times per
week for 3 weeks.
Tissue preparation
After 3 weeks of suspension and/or treatment, the ani-
mals were anesthetized. The right tibiae were removed
and ﬁxed with 70% ethanol. The tibiae were then
stained with Villanueva bone stain and embedded in
methylmethacrylate (MMA). The proximal tibiae were
sectioned frontally into 5-µm sections, using a Jung-
K microtome (R. Jung, Heidelberg, Germany), and
subjected to measurement.
Histomorphometry
Histomorphometry, performed under a light micro-
scope, was based on the zone deﬁnitions described by
Reinholt et al. [28]. The portion of the cell column in
which the ratio of cell width to cell height was greater
than two was deﬁned as the proliferative zone, and the
portion in which the ratio of cell width to cell height was
less than two was termed the hypertrophic zone. Three
measurements per section (left, middle, and right) were
obtained for both the height and the cell number per

=========== PAGE 3 ===========
T. Ogawa et al.: Human PTH induces longitudinal bone growth in rats
85
column, and were used to calculate the mean value per
animal. A semiautomatic image analyzer system con-
nected to a personal computer (System Supply, Nagano,
Japan) was used to obtain height measurements at
200. The means of three sections were averaged to
obtain the mean for an animal.
To evaluate the longitudinal growth rate (LGR) in
young rats, the animals were given two doses of tetracy-
cline hydrochloride (30mg/kgbw) one dose 6 days
before they were killed and one dose 1 day before they
were killed, to label the site of mineralization. In adult
rats, the animals were given the same doses of tetracy-
cline hydrochloride (30mg/kgbw) 12 days and 2 days
before they were killed. By ﬂuorescence microscopy,
measurements of LGR were made between the two
ﬂuorescent bands corresponding to the injections of
tetracycline [1]. LGR was expressed as micrometers per
day. Three measurements per section were obtained,
and then the mean values calculated for three different
sections were averaged to obtain a mean value per ani-
mal. With LGR, the rate of cartilage cell production
was estimated as follows: rate of cartilage cell produc-
tion (per day)  longitudinal growth rate (micrometers/
day)/height of degenerative cell (micrometers) [1].
The hypertrophic chondrocytes located close to the
metaphysis are synonymous with the degenerative cells
determined in the present study [1]. The mean degen-
erative cell height was calculated by measuring the
height of 20 degenerative cartilage cells from each sec-
tion. Statistical analysis was performed using analysis
of variance (ANOVA), with Fisher’s protected least
signiﬁcant difference (PLSD) test. A P value of less
than 0.05 was considered signiﬁcant.
Results
Body weight
Growth disturbance was not observed in all groups.
Suspension by the tail for 3 weeks did not signiﬁcantly
affect body weights in young and adult rats. Similarly,
treatment with PTH did not signiﬁcantly affect body
weights in young and adult rats.
Thickness of and number of chondrocytes in
the growth plate
The results of the histomorphometric analysis of young
rat growth plate under light microscopy are presented
in Fig. 1. There was a signiﬁcant decrease in total
growth plate thickness in control rats (G II) compared
with ﬁndings in basal control rats (G I) (Fig. 1A). This
change in control rats was due to a signiﬁcant decrease
in both proliferative and hypertrophic zone thickness.
There was a signiﬁcant increase in total growth plate
thickness in PTH-treated control (G III) rats compared
with that in control rats (G II) (Figs. 1, 2). The total
growth plate thickness of PTH-treated control rats (G
III) reached the level in the basal control rats (G I)
(Figs. 1, 2), whereas the mean cell number per column
was signiﬁcantly decreased in PTH-treated control rats
(G III) compared with the number in basal control rats
(G I). These data indicated that cell density was lower in
PTH-treated control rats (G III) than in the basal con-
trol rats (G I). This reduction of cell number in PTH-
treated control rats (G III) was reﬂected in a signiﬁcant
decrease in the cell number in the proliferative zone
(Fig. 1B), but there was no decrease in cell number
in the hypertrophic zone. Morphologic changes were
observed in proliferative zone chondrocytes in the
PTH-treated controls. In basal control rats (G I), the
chondrocytes in the proliferative zone were ﬂattened,
while in PTH-treated control rats (G III), the
chondrocytes in the same zone were more ellipsoidal
(Fig. 3).
In young rats, skeletal unloading for 21 days (G IV)
resulted in a decrease in tibial growth plate thickness
compared with that in control rats (G II) (Figs. 1, 2).
This was associated with a signiﬁcant reduction in
proliferative zone thickness (Fig. 1A). In PTH-treated
unloaded young rats (G V), growth plate thickness, and
cell number per column were increased compared with
unloaded rats (G IV) (Fig. 1A, B).
Results from the histomorphometry of adult rats (G
VI–X) are presented in Figs. 4 and 5. There was a sig-
niﬁcant decrease in total growth plate thickness in con-
trol rats (G VII) compared with that in basal control
rats (G VI) (Figs. 4, 5).
Longitudinal growth rate and cell production rate
In young rats, LGR was signiﬁcantly increased in PTH-
treated control rats (G III) compared with control
rats (G II) (Table 1), whereas LGR was signiﬁcantly
decreased in unloaded rats (G IV). In PTH-treated un-
loaded young rats (G V), LGR was increased compared
with that in unloaded rats (G IV) (Table 1). Similar
results were obtained for the evaluation of cell produc-
tion rate (CPR) in young rats (Table 1).
In adult rats, LGR tended to be higher in PTH-
treated control rats (G VIII) than in control rats (G
VII), but the difference was not signiﬁcant (Table 2).
LGR was signiﬁcantly decreased in unloaded rats (G
IX) compared with that in control rats (G VII) and
PTH-treated control rats (G VIII) (Table 2). LGR was
also lower in PTH-treated-unloaded rats (G X) than in
PTH-treated control (G VIII) rats (Table 2). Similar
results were obtained for the evaluation of CPR in adult
rats (Table 2).

=========== PAGE 4 ===========
86
T. Ogawa et al.: Human PTH induces longitudinal bone growth in rats
Discussion
The growth plate is a transverse cartilagenous tissue
that separates the epiphyseal bone from the diaphyseal
bone. Its function has been shown to be twofold: (1) it
drives the process of bone elongation, and (2) it pro-
vides a scaffolding for the construction of cancellous
bone within the metaphysis. Together with the meta-
physis, the growth plates constitute the longitudinal
growth zone of bone. The total growth plate thickness
has been used as an index of longitudinal bone growth
[1,8]. The rate of longitudinal bone growth is the prod-
uct of two factors within the growth plate: the rate of
production of new cells per column, and the average
Fig. 1. Changes in thickness per zone and
total growth plate (A) and in cell number
per zone and total cell column (B) for all
experimental groups of young rats (n  6
for all groups). PZ, Proliferative zone; HZ,
hypertrophic zone; GP, growth plate. Error
bars indicate SE. Signiﬁcantly different
paired comparisons are indicated by letters
above bars. a  P  0.05 compared with
group (G) I; b  P  0.05 compared with G
II; c  P  0.05 compared with G III; d  P
 0.05 compared with G IV; e  P  0.05
compared with G V. See text for explana-
tion of groups
Table 1. Longitudinal growth rate and cell production rate in the proximal growth plate of young rat tibiae
G II, (control,
G III, (PTH-treated,
G IV,
G V, (PTH-treated,
normally loaded)
normally loaded)
(unloaded)
unloaded)
Longitudinal
207.0  11.4
235.0  18.8*
182.9  19.0**
226.4  26.1*
growth rate (µm/day)
Cell production
10.4  1.1
12.0  1.0*
9.1  0.9**
12.5  1.4*
rate (cells/day)
*P  0.05 compared with G II and G IV; **P  0.05 compared with G II, G III, and GV
Values are means  SD
G, Group; PTH, parathyroid hormone

=========== PAGE 5 ===========
T. Ogawa et al.: Human PTH induces longitudinal bone growth in rats
87
size of the most metaphyseally situated degenerative
cell. Thorngren and Hansson [1] reported that the de-
crease in longitudinal bone growth with increasing age
is due partly to a decrease in cell production and partly
to a decrease in degenerative cell size in the growth
plate. They concluded that the inﬂuence of cell produc-
tion and mitotic activity dominated.
We found that the systemic administration of PTH in
young rats increased both the total growth plate thick-
ness and the rate of longitudinal bone growth. The rate
of cell production was increased by PTH administra-
tion, whereas degenerative cell size was not affected
(data not shown). This ﬁnding suggests that the effect of
PTH administration is mainly due to an increased cell
production rate, and is not due to an increase in degen-
erative cell size. Although the cellular effects of PTH on
chondrocytes are complex, our ﬁndings indicate that the
systemic administration of PTH increased the longitu-
dinal bone growth by inducing new cell production in
normal young rats. From this effect, we suggest that
PTH is an important endocrine factor in the regulation
of long bone growth in the young rat.
In the PTH-treated group of young rats, the total
growth plate thickness was increased, and almost
reached the baseline value, whereas the cell number per
column was signiﬁcantly decreased compared with the
baseline value. This reduction in the PTH-treated rats
was reﬂected in a signiﬁcant decrease in the prolifera-
tive zone cell number. In this study, the chondrocytes in
the proliferative zone in basal control rats were ﬂat-
tened, while in the PTH-treated rats, the chondrocytes
were more ellipsoidal. This ﬁnding indicated that cell
proliferation was reduced in the growth plate of the
PTH-treated rats. In young rats, PTH administration
induced proliferation of growth plate chondrocytes, but
could not maintain the proliferative activity in the basal
control rat growth plate. We think that not only the
growth plate thickness but also the cell number per
column, and the chondrocyte morphology, should be
Fig. 2. Growth plate cartilage in young rats. A G I; B G II; C G III; D G IV; E G V. Note the treatment-induced increase in the
thickness of and in the number of chondrocytes in growth cartilage. Bar, 100µm
Fig. 3. Chondrocytes in the proliferative zone. A G I; B G III.
In G I, chondrocytes were ﬂattened, while in G III, the
chondrocytes were more ellipsoidal. Note that the cell density
was reduced in G III compared with that in G I. Bar, 10µm
Table 2. Longitudinal growth rate and cell production rate in the proximal growth plate of adult rat tibiae
G VII, (control,
G VIII, (PTH-treated,
G IX,
G X, (PTH-treated,
normally loaded)
normally loaded)
(unloaded)
unloaded)
Longitudinal
74.2  4.5
81.7  8.4
58.5  12.4*
65.4  7.5**
growth rate (µm/day)
Cell production
3.5  0.3
3.8  0.4
3.0  0.5*
3.2  0.3**
rate (cells/day)
*P  0.05 compared with G VII and G VIII; **P  0.05 compared with G VIII
Values are means  SD
G, Group; PTH, parathyroid hormone

=========== PAGE 6 ===========
88
T. Ogawa et al.: Human PTH induces longitudinal bone growth in rats
investigated to evaluate the proliferative activity of the
growth plate.
Previous studies using the tail-suspension model
showed a decrease in the thickness and in the number of
cells per column of the growth plate in young rats com-
pared with ﬁndings in controls [8]. It was also reported
that LGR was decreased with unloading [8]. In the
present study, 21 days of skeletal unloading induced
signiﬁcant changes in growth plate organization in the
tibiae of the young rats. In the unloaded rats, total
Fig. 4. Changes in thickness per zone and
total growth plate (A) and in cell number
per zone and total cell column (B) for all
experimental groups of adult rats (n  6
for all groups). PZ, Proliferative zone; HZ,
hypertrophic zone. Error bars indicate SE.
Signiﬁcantly different paired comparisons
are indicated by letters above bars. a  P 
0.05 compared with G VII, G VIII, G IX,
and G X
Fig. 5. Growth plate cartilage in adult rats. A G VI; B G VII; C G VIII; D G IX; E G X. The thickness and the number of
chondrocytes are decreased in other groups compared with the ﬁndings in G VI. Bar, 100µm

=========== PAGE 7 ===========
T. Ogawa et al.: Human PTH induces longitudinal bone growth in rats
89
growth plate thickness and cell number per column
were decreased compared with ﬁndings in controls. This
reduction in unloaded rats was reﬂected in a signiﬁcant
decrease in the proliferative zone, in accordance with
ﬁndings in a previous report [8]. Concurrently, LGR
was also decreased in unloaded rats. In the PTH-treated
unloaded rats, growth plate thickness, cell number per
column, and LGR were all increased compared with
ﬁndings in the unloaded rats. These in-vivo results are
in accordance with in vitro data showing that PTH in-
creases the proliferation of growth plate chondrocytes
[29,30]. These ﬁndings indicated that PTH administra-
tion can partly prevent the abnormalities induced by
unloading, even the decreased LGR, by increasing the
proliferation of the growth plate in young rats.
Adult growth plate chondrocytes appear to be
less responsive to PTH administration than those of
younger animals. This ﬁnding is in accordance with the
ﬁndings of a previous report [29]. In adult animals, we
found no signiﬁcant differences between control and
PTH-treated rats with regard to thickness or cell num-
ber per growth plate zone. These ﬁndings indicated that
the responsiveness of chondrocytes in the growth plate
of adult rats to PTH was reduced. However, a recent
study has suggested that the PTH/PTHrP receptor was
abundantly expressed in growth plate chondrocytes
throughout development in rats, even in adult rats [12].
We do not know precisely why the chondrocyte respon-
siveness to PTH was reduced in the adult growth plate,
even though the receptor is still expressed. This reduced
responsiveness may be related to the reduction in cell
numbers in the adult growth plate. Further studies are
needed to elucidate the mechanism of PTH effects on
the adult growth plate.
Based on the tail-suspension studies, the growth
plates of 15-week-old rats appearred to be less respon-
sive to unloading than those of younger rats, a result
that is similar to the results of a previous study [3]. In
adult animals, suspension had no effect on growth plate
thickness or cell number. However, in our study, LGR
and CPR were reduced by unloading. This ﬁnding sug-
gests that growth plate thickness and cell number do not
directly reﬂect the LGR. LGR and CPR may be more
sensitive indices than growth plate thickness and cell
number for evaluating the activity of the growth plate.
As described here, PTH administration increased the
proliferative activity of the growth plate, and also in-
creased the LGR in young rats. These data indicate that
PTH may be used as a therapeutic agent in diseases, in
which there is early closure of the growth plate, because
of its stimulation of growth plate cartilage.
Acknowledgments. The authors are most grateful to Dr.
Masayuki Hori, Asahi Chemical Industries (Shizuoka,
Japan), for providing synthetic human PTH (1–34),
and they express their sincere thanks to Mr. Hideki
Akazawa, Mr. Yoshiaki Tanaka, and Ms. Akemi Ito for
their technical support.
References
1. Thorngren KG, Hansson LI (1973) Cell kinetics and morphology
of the growth plate in the normal and hypophysectomized rat.
Calcif Tissue Res 13:113–129
2. Simon MR (1978) The effect of dynamic loading on the growth of
epiphyseal cartilage in the rat. Acta Anat 102:176–183
3. Montufar-Solis D, Duke PJ, Durnova G (1992) Spaceﬂight and
age affect tibial epiphyseal growth plate histomorphometry. J
Appl Physiol 73:19S–25S
4. Westerlind KC, Turner RT (1995) The skeletal effects of
spaceﬂight in growing rats: tissue-speciﬁc alterations in mRNA
levels for TGF-. J Bone Miner Res 10:843–848
5. Schwartz Z, Semba S, Graves D, Dean DD, Sylvia VL, Boyan BD
(1997) Rapid and long-term effects of PTH(1–34) on growth plate
chondrocytes are mediated through two different pathways in a
cell-maturation-dependent manner. Bone 21:249–259
6. Montufar-Solis D, Duke PJ, Durnova G (1999) Gravitational
changes affect tibial growth plates according to Hert’s curve.
Aviat Space Environ Med 70:245–249
7. Duke PJ, Durnova G, Montufar-Solis D (1990) Histomorpho-
metric and electron microscopic analysis of tibial epiphyseal plate
from Cosmos 1887 rats. FASEB J 4:41–46
8. Zerath E, Holy X, Mouillon JM, Farbos B, Machwate M, Andre
C, Renaut S, Makie PJ (1997) TGF-2 prevents the impaired
chondrocyte proliferation induced by unloading in growth plate
of young rats. Life Sci 61:2397–2406
9. Reinecke M, Schmid AC, Heyberger-Meyer B, Hunziker EB,
Zapf J (2000) Effect of growth hormone and insulin-like growth
factor I (IGF-I) on the expression of IGF-I messenger ribonucleic
acid and peptide in rat tibial growth plate and articular
chondrocytes in vivo. Endocrinology 141:2847–2853
10. Robson H, Siebler T, Stevens DA, Shalet SM, Williams GR
(2000) Thyroid hormone acts directly on growth plate chondro-
cytes to promote hypertrophic differentiation and inhibit clonal
expression and cell proliferation. Endocrinology 141:3887–3897
11. Barling PM, Bibby NJ (1985) Study of the localization of [3H]
Bovine parathyroid hormone in bone by light microscope auto-
radiography. Calcif Tissue Int 37:441–446
12. Van Der Eerden BCJ, Karperien M, Gevers EF, Lowik CWGM,
Wit JM (2000) Expression of Indian hedgehog and parathyroid
hormone-related proteins, and their receptors in the post natal
growth plate of the rat: evidence for a locally acting growth re-
straining feedback loop after birth. J Bone Miner Res 15:1045–
1055
13. Amizuka N, Warshawsky Henderson JE, Goltzman D, Karaplis C
(1994) Parathyroid hormone-related peptide-depleted mice show
abnormal epiphyseal cartilage development and altered endo-
chondral bone formation. J Cell Biol 126:1611–1623
14. Amizuka N, Henderson JE, Hoshi K, Warshawsky H, Ozawa H,
Goltzman D, Karaplis AC (1996) Programmed cell death of
chondrocytes and aberrant chondrogenesis in mice homozygous
for parathyroid hormone-related peptide gene deletion. Endocri-
nology 137:5055–5067
15. Lanske B, Karaplis AC, Lee K, Luz A, Vortkamp A, Pirro A,
Karperien M, Deﬁze LHK, Ho C, Mulligan RC, Abou-Samra AB,
Juppner H, Segre GV, Kronenberg HM (1996) PTH/PTHrP re-
ceptor in early development and Indian hedgehog-regulated bone
growth. Science 273:663–666
16. Vortkamp A, Lee K, Lanske B, Serge GV, Kronenberg HM,
Tabin CJ (1996) Regulation of rate of cartilage differentiation by
Indian hedgehog and PTH-related protein. Science 273:613–622

=========== PAGE 8 ===========
90
T. Ogawa et al.: Human PTH induces longitudinal bone growth in rats
17. Lee K, Lanske B, Karaplis AC, Deeds JD, Kohno H, Nissenson
A, Kronenberg HM, Segre GV (1996) Parathyroid hormone-
related peptide delays terminal differentiation of chondrocytes
during endochondral bone development. Endocrinology 137:
5109–5118
18. Weir EC, Philbrick WM, Amling M, Neff LA, Bron R, Broadus
AE (1996) Target overexpression of parathyroid hormone-
related peptide in chondrocytes causes chondrodysplasia and de-
layed endochondral bone formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
93:10240–10245
19. Amling M, Neff L, Tanaka S, Inoue D, Kuida K, Weir E, Philbrick
WM, Broadus AE, Baron R (1997) Bcl-2 lies downstream of
parathyroid hormone-related peptide in a signaling pathway that
regulates chondrocyte maturation during skeletal development.
J Cell Biol 136:205–213
20. Schipani E, Lanske B, Hunzelman J, Luz A, Kovacs CS, Lee K,
Pirro A, Kronenberg HM, Juppner H (1997) Targeted expression
of constitutively active receptors for parathyroid hormone and
parathyroid hormone-related peptide delays endochondral bone
formation and rescues mice that lack parathyroid hormone-
related peptide. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:13689–13694
21. St-Jacques B, Hammerschmidt M, McMahon AP (1999) Indian
hedgehog signaling regulates proliferation and differentiation of
chondrocytes and is essential for bone formation. Genes Dev
13:2072–2086
22. Suda N, Shibata S, Yamazaki K, Kuroda T, Senior PV, Beck F,
Hammond VE (1999) Parathyroid hormone-related protein regu-
lates proliferation of condylar hypertrophic chondrocytes. J Bone
Miner Res 14:1838–1847
23. Chung U, Lanske B, Lee K, Li E, Kronenberg H (1998) The
parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone-related peptide re-
ceptor coordinates endochondral bone development by directly
controlling chondrocyte differentiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
95:13030–13005
24. Schipani E, Kruse K, Juppner H (1995) A constitutively active
mutant PTH-PTHrP receptor in Jansen-type metaphyseal chon-
drodysplasia. Science 268:98–100
25. Harvey AK, Yu XP, Frolik CA, Chandrasekhar S (1999)
Parathyroid hormone-(1–34) enhances aggrecan synthesis via an
insulin-like growth factor-I pathway. J Biol Chem 274:23249–
23255
26. Morey ER (1979) spaceﬂight and bone turnover: correlation
with a new rat model of weightlessness. Bioscience 29:168–
172
27. Sweeney JR, Marshall GJ, Gruber H, Kirchen ME (1984) Effects
of non-weight bearing on fracture healing. Physiologist 27
(Suppl):S35–S36
28. Reinholt FP, Hjerpe A, Jansson K, Engfeldt B (1984) Stereologi-
cal studies on the epiphyseal growth plate in low phosphate, vita-
min D-deﬁciency rickets with special reference to the distribution
of matrix vesicles. Calcif Tissue Int 36:95–101
29. Koike T, Iwamoto M, Shimazu A, Nakashima K, Suzuki F, Kato
Y (1990) Potent mitogenic effects of parathyroid hormone (PTH)
on embryonic chick and rabbit chondrocytes. J Clin Invest 85:626–
631
30. Crabb ID, O’Keefe RJ, Puzas JE, Rosier RN (1992) Diiferential
effects of parathyroid hormone on chick growth plate and articu-
lar chondrocytes. Calcif Tissue Int 50:61–66
