Depletion of resting zone chondrocytes during growth plate
senescence
Lenneke Schrier, Sandra P Ferns, Kevin M Barnes,
Joyce A M Emons, Eric I Newman, Ola Nilsson
and Jeffrey Baron*
Developmental Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, CRC, Room 1-3330,
10 Center Drive, MSC 1103, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA
(Requests for offprints should be addressed to J Baron; Email: Jeffrey.baron @nih.gov)
*(J Brown is a Commissioned Officer in the United States Public Health Service)
Abstract
With age, the growth plate undergoes senescent changes
that cause linear bone growth to slow and ﬁnally cease.
Based on previous indirect evidence, we hypothesized
that this senescent decline occurs because growth plate
stem-like cells, located in the resting zone, have a ﬁnite
proliferative capacity that is gradually depleted. Con-
sistent with this hypothesis, we found that the prolifer-
ation rate in rabbit resting zone chondrocytes (assessed by
continuous 5-bromo-2/p9-deoxy-uridine labeling) decreases
with age, as does the number of resting zone chondrocytes
per area of growth plate.
Glucocorticoid excess slows growth plate senescence.
To explain this e ﬀect, we hypothesized that glucocor-
ticoid inhibits resting zone chondrocyte proliferation, thus
conserving their proliferative capacity. Consistent with
this hypothesis, we found that dexamethasone treatment
decreased the proliferation rate of rabbit resting zone
chondrocytes and slowed the numerical depletion of these
cells. Estrogen is known to accelerate growth plate
senescence. However, we found that estradiol cypionate
treatment slowed resting zone chondrocyte proliferation.
Our ﬁndings support the hypotheses that growth plate
senescence is caused by qualitative and quantitative deple-
tion of stem-like cells in the resting zone and that
growth-inhibiting conditions, such as glucocorticoid
excess, slow senescence by slowing resting zone chondro-
cyte proliferation and slowing the numerical depletion of
these cells, thereby conserving the proliferative capacity of
the growth plate. We speculate that estrogen might
accelerate senescence by a proliferation-independent mech-
anism, or by increasing the loss of proliferative capacity
per cell cycle.
Journal of Endocrinology (2006) 189, 27–36
Introduction
In humans, the rate of longitudinal bone growth, and
hence the rate of overall linear growth, decreases with age.
The prenatal linear growth rate exceeds 100 cm/year.
However, by the time of birth, the growth rate has fallen
to about 50 cm/year, and at the age of 10 years the growth
rate is about 5 cm/year. This decline is brieﬂy interrupted
by a pubertal growth spurt, after which the deceleration
resumes and the growth rate approaches zero (T anner &
Davies 1985). In other mammals, a similar dramatic
decline in growth rate occurs, but without a superimposed
pubertal growth spurt.
Kember and Walker (1971) showed that this senescent
decline in growth rate is due, in large part, to a decrease in
the proliferation rate of growth plate chondrocytes. These
functional senescent changes are accompanied by struc-
tural senescent changes. There is a gradual decline in the
overall growth plate height, proliferative zone height,
hypertrophic zone height, size of hypertrophic chondro-
cytes, and column density (Kember & Walker 1971,
Kember 1973, Masoud et al. 1986a, Masoud et al. 1986b,
Walker & Kember 1972 a, Walker & Kember 1972 b,
Hunziker & Schenk 1989, Farquharson & Loveridge
1990, Weise et al. 2001). The growth plate undergoes
ossiﬁcation as the ﬁnal step in the senescence program
(Weise et al. 2001).
Growth plate senescence appears to be caused by a
mechanism intrinsic to the growth plate (Nilsson & Baron
2004). Previous studies suggest that information about the
prior growth history is retained within the growth plate
and inﬂuences subsequent growth plate structure and
function (Gafni et al. 2001). The cell most likely to carry
this information is the resting zone chondrocyte because
it is the only cell involved in the growth process that
remains in the growth plate over long periods of time.
27
Journal of Endocrinology (2006) 189, 27–36
0022–0795/06/0189–027 /p302006 Society for Endocrinology Printed in Great Britain
DOI: 10.1677/joe.1.06489
Online version via http://www.endocrinology-journals.org
Any information carried by the proliferative/hypertrophic
chondrocytes would presumably be lost when these cells
reach the metaphyseal border of the growth plate,
undergo apoptosis, and are replaced by bone (Farnum &
Wilsman 1987).
We have recently shown evidence that the resting zone
chondrocytes serve as a pool of stem-like cells that
generate columnar clones of proliferative zone chondro-
cytes (Abad et al. 2002). We have also found evidence
suggesting that growth plate senescence is not a function
of time per se but rather of the cumulative number of
divisions that the chondrocytes have undergone (Gafni
et al. 2001). T aken together, these previous ﬁndings
suggest the following model: 1) stem-like cells in the
resting zone have a ﬁnite proliferative capacity which is
gradually exhausted; 2) as this proliferative capacity is
exhausted, the proliferation rate of the proliferative zone
chondrocytes (which are derived from the stem-like cells)
decreases, causing longitudinal bone growth to slow with
age and eventually cease.
This depletion of the stem-like cells in the resting zone
could be qualitative and/or quantitative; with age there
could be a decrease in the proliferative capacity per
stem-like cell and/or a decrease in the number of stem-
like cells. However, little is known about these chondro-
cytes. Even their proliferation rate has not been previously
measured, perhaps because it is too slow to be assessed by
pulse labeling approaches.
Based on our model, we hypothesized that the prolifer-
ation rate of resting zone chondrocytes decreases with age,
reﬂecting their diminishing proliferative capacity. We have
previously shown evidence that glucocorticoid slows
growth plate senescence (Gafni et al. 2001). Therefore, we
further hypothesized that glucocorticoid acts by slowing
resting zone chondrocyte proliferation, thus conserving
their proliferative capacity and hence slowing senescence.
In contrast, estrogen accelerates growth plate senescence
(Weise et al. 2001), raising the possibility that estrogen
might stimulate resting zone chondrocyte proliferation
and thus accelerate depletion of their proliferative capacity.
Materials and Methods
Animal experiments
New Zealand White (NZW) male rabbits (Covance
Research Products, Denver, PA, USA) were housed and
cared for in accordance with the Guide for the Care and
Use of Laboratory Animals (National Research Council
2003). The experimental procedures were approved by
the Animal Care and Use Committee (National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health, USA). All animals received National
Institutes of Health open formula rabbit ration (NIH 32)
and water ad libitum.
Figure 1 Location of reserve and epiphyseal chondrocytes in the
resting zone. Reserve chondrocytes (r) are ﬂattened and often
grouped in pairs aligned parallel to the long axis of the bone.
Epiphyseal chondrocytes (e) are round or elliptical and mostly
scattered individually in the cartilage matrix. Representative
longitudinal section of resting zone of 6-week-old male NZW
rabbit stained with Masson Trichome is shown. (p), proliferative
chondrocyte; (b), bone tissue.
L SCHRIER and others · Depletion of resting zone chondrocytes28
www.endocrinology-journals.orgJournal of Endocrinology (2006) 189, 27–36
To study the e ﬀect of age on resting zone proliferation
in vivo, animals were studied at the end of gestation, and at
postnatal week 5, 9, and 17. The ﬁrst time point represents
the initial period of very rapid longitudinal bone growth.
For simplicity, we refer to this time point as 0 weeks of
age. The remaining time points represent the subsequent
period of progressively decreasing growth (Masoud et al.
1986b, Nilsson et al. 2005). To avoid the confounding
eﬀects of gonadal steroids, rabbits studied at 9 and 17
weeks of age were previously castrated at 6 weeks of age.
Five-week-old animals remained intact because they are
sexually immature. Because resting zone cells replicate
slowly, we made the measurement of proliferation rate by
prolonged, continuous labeling of newly synthesized
DNA using 5-bromo-2 /p9-deoxy-uridine (BrdU). Pregnant
females (gestational age 22 days, n=2) and 5-, 9-, and
17-week-old New Zealand White male rabbits ( n=6–8
per group) received a subcutaneous osmotic minipump
(2 ML-1; Alza Corp, Palo Alto, CA, USA) delivering
BrdU (Sigma-Aldrich Corp.) suspended in physiological
saline at a rate of 200 µg BrdU/kg/h. After the one-week
infusion period, animals were killed by pentobarbital
overdose. The pregnant females were killed at 29 days
gestation, and a total of twelve fetuses were studied.
Growth plate collections were made from the distal femur
(DF), proximal tibia (PT), and distal tibia (DT). Growth
plates were ﬁxed in 10% phosphate-bu ﬀered formalin for
24 h, decalciﬁed in 0·5 M EDTA, placed in 70% ethanol
for storage, and embedded in para ﬃn, after which longi-
tudinal 5 µm sections were obtained from the center of
the bone.
To study the e ﬀect of dexamethasone and estrogen on
resting zone proliferation, animals received either estradiol
cypionate (Pharmacia & Upjohn Company, Kalamazoo,
MI, USA), 70 µg/kg i.m. weekly, dexamethasone (Phoenix
Pharmaceutical, St Joseph, MO, USA), 0·5 mg/kg s.c.
daily or vehicle (cottonseed oil im weekly as vehicle for
estradiol cypionate and normal saline s.c. daily as vehicle
for dexamethasone) for two weeks ( n=6–7 per treatment
group). This dose of estradiol cypionate produces near-
physiological adult levels (Weise et al. 2001). This dose of
dexamethasone is supraphysiological and has previously
been shown to inhibit growth (Gafni et al. 2001) and cause
osteoporosis (Gafni et al. 2002). Animals were weaned at
3 weeks of age. Treatment was begun at 4 weeks of age
and lasted 2 weeks. After the ﬁrst week of treatment, all
animals underwent minipump implantation to deliver
BrdU (200 µg BrdU/kg per hour). After a total of 2 weeks
treatment, animals were killed by pentobarbital overdose.
Figure 2 Proliferation in resting zone chondrocytes assessed by
BrdU-labeling (brown color). Fetal (A), 5-week-old (B), and
17-week-old (C) NZW rabbits received a 1-week infusion of BrdU
using a subcutaneous osmotic pump. BrdU-labeled cells were
detected by immunohistochemistry in longitudinal sections of the
growth plates. Representative photomicrographs are shown.
Depletion of resting zone chondrocytes · L SCHRIER and others 29
www.endocrinology-journals.org Journal of Endocrinology (2006) 189, 27–36
Blood was drawn prior to sacriﬁce for measurement of
estradiol and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I). Growth
plates were isolated as described previously.
Immunohistochemistry
BrdU-labeled cells in growth plates were visualized by
immunohistochemical staining using BrdU in situ detec-
tion kit II (BD Biosciences Pharmingen, San Diego, CA,
USA). BrdU staining was performed as per the manufac-
turer’s protocol, except that the antigen-retrieval time was
extended to 15 min. Subsequently, the antigen-retrieval
solution was allowed to cool down to room temperature
for 25 min, and the incubation with anti-BrdU antibody
was done overnight at 4 /p8C. Sections were counterstained
lightly with hematoxylin. As a negative control, sections
of bone from animals not infused with BrdU were
subjected to the same immunohistochemical procedure;
no staining was observed.
Cell kinetics
In fetal animals, the resting zone can be subdivided into
two regions, the reserve cartilage and the epiphyseal
cartilage. The reserve cartilage lies closest to the prolifer-
ative zone and contains ﬂattened chondrocytes. These
chondrocytes are often grouped in pairs aligned parallel to
the long axis of the bone. The epiphyseal cartilage lies
further from the proliferative zone and thus closer to the
bony epiphysis than the reserve cartilage. The epiphyseal
cartilage contains round or elliptical chondrocytes, mostly
scattered individually in the cartilage matrix (Abad et al.
2002). In older animals, both reserve chondrocytes and
epiphyseal chondrocytes are far less numerous and they
are more intermixed, without a distinct boundary (Fig. 1).
We measured the BrdU-labeling index and numbers of
cells in both subpopulations. Because the distinction is
subjective, we also analyzed these measurements for the
overall resting zone, including both cell types.
A single, blinded observer assessed cell proliferation
by light microscopy. The central two-thirds of the
growth plate was used for analysis; the lateral portions of
the growth plate adjacent to the perichondrium were
excluded. The BrdU-labeling index was deﬁned as the
number of BrdU-labeled cells divided by the total number
of labeled and unlabeled cells (with visible nuclei, counted
using phase contrast). The calculation of the labeling
index in each growth plate was based on at least 300 cells.
We also assessed the number of resting zone cells per
millimeter growth plate, measured perpendicular to the
Figure 3 Effect of age on the proliferation rate of chondrocytes in
the overall resting zone (A), and in the epiphyseal region (B), and
the reserve region (C) of the resting zone. 0- (late fetal), 5-, 9-, and
17-week-old rabbits ( n=6–12 per group) were infused with BrdU
for one week. BrdU labeling was assessed immunohistochemically
in distal femur d, proximal tibia •, and distal tibia /p20.T h e
BrdU-labeling index represents the number of BrdU-labeled cells
divided by the total number of labeled and unlabeled cells. There
is an overall effect of age for all three panels. P<0·001, ANOVA;
*P /p990·001 for pairwise comparison.
L SCHRIER and others · Depletion of resting zone chondrocytes30
www.endocrinology-journals.orgJournal of Endocrinology (2006) 189, 27–36
long axis of the bone. This value reﬂects, in three
dimensions, the number of resting zone chondrocytes in
the growth plate, divided by the circular area of the
growth plate.
Assays
Serum IGF-I and estradiol concentrations were measured
by radioimmunoassay at Esoterix Inc. (Austin, Texas, USA).
Statistical analysis
Data are presented as mean /p5S.E.M. The e ﬀects of age,
estrogen, and dexamethasone on resting zone proliferation
and on number of cells were evaluated by two-way
repeated-measures ANOVA. For the e ﬀect of age, the
ANOVA was followed by Holm-Sidak tests for pairwise
multiple comparison. We chose not to analyze di ﬀerences
among di ﬀerent growth plates because these comparisons
would have had less statistical power than the overall
comparisons due to smaller sample size and the need to
correct for multiple comparisons.
Results
Eﬀects of age
The BrdU-labeling index in the resting zone decreased
signiﬁcantly with age ( P<0·001, Fig. 2 and 3). For
example, in the distal femur the labeling index decreased
from 95·6 /p50·8% at 0 weeks of age to 9·2 /p51·2% at
5 weeks, 9·2 /p51·1% at 9 weeks, and 7·6 /p51·5% at
17 weeks of age. We also subdivided the resting zone into
the epiphyseal region and the reserve resting zone. The
BrdU-labeling index decreased with age in both regions
(P<0·001, Fig. 3B and C), although, in the epiphyseal
region, a signiﬁcant decrease was only observed during the
0–5w e e k interval.
The 1-week continuous infusion of BrdU labeled
essentially all proliferative chondrocytes, thus conﬁrming
that the proliferation rate in proliferative zone chondro-
cytes is more rapid than in resting zone chondrocytes. The
hypertrophic chondrocytes were also all labeled, presum-
ably because proliferative chondrocytes were labeled and
then underwent terminal di ﬀerentiation to become
hypertrophic chondrocytes. We could conﬁrm that this
widespread labeling in the proliferative zone and the
hypertrophic zone was not artifactual because it was not
seen in control animals that did not receive BrdU,
Figure 4 Effect of age on the number of chondrocytes in the
overall resting zone (A), and in the epiphyseal region (B), and the
reserve region (C) of the resting zone. The number of cells per
mm of growth plate (measured perpendicular to the long axis of
the bone) was assessed in the distal femur d, proximal tibia •,
and distal tibia /p20of 0- (late fetal), 5-, 9-, and 17-week-old rabbits
(n=6–12 per group). In the fetal rabbit, the number of cells is
shown only as a lower limit because, at this age, there is no
secondary ossiﬁcation center to form an upper margin of the
resting zone and therefore the resting zone extended beyond the
counting area. There is an overall effect of age for all three panels.
P<0·001, ANOVA; * P<0·001 for pairwise comparison.
Depletion of resting zone chondrocytes · L SCHRIER and others 31
www.endocrinology-journals.org Journal of Endocrinology (2006) 189, 27–36
and because a single injection of BrdU produced more
selective labeling of proliferative zone chondrocytes and
no labeling of hypertrophic zone chondrocytes (data
not shown).
The number of resting zone chondrocytes per mm of
growth plate also decreased with age in the overall resting
zone ( P<0·001, Fig. 4A), in the epiphyseal resting zone
(P<0·001, Fig. 4B), and in the reserve resting zone
(P<0·001, Fig. 4C).
Eﬀects of dexamethasone and estradiol
To gain insight into the e ﬀect of hormones on the resting
zone, 4-week-old rabbits were treated with dexametha-
sone, estradiol, or vehicle for two weeks. BrdU-labeling
was performed during the second week of the treatment.
The BrdU-labeling index in the resting zone decreased
with dexamethasone treatment ( P<0·001, Fig. 5A). This
decrease was seen in both the epiphyseal ( P<0·001,
Fig. 5B) and the reserve resting zone ( P<0·001, Fig. 5C).
The number of resting zone chondrocytes was greater
with dexamethasone treatment ( P= 0·016, Fig. 6A). This
eﬀect was detected in the reserve resting zone ( P<0·001,
Fig. 6C), but not in the epiphyseal resting zone (Fig. 6B).
Dexamethasone treatment did not signiﬁcantly a ﬀect
serum IGF-I concentration (112 /p58 ng/mL vs 108 /p5
6 ng/mL, dexamethasone vs control, P=NS).
The BrdU-labeling index in the resting zone was
decreased by estrogen treatment ( P= 0·011, Fig. 7A). This
decrease occurred in the epiphyseal resting zone
(P= 0·008, Fig. 7B), but the decrease did not reach
statistical signiﬁcance in the reserve resting zone ( P= 0·06,
Fig. 7C). Estrogen treatment did not signiﬁcantly a ﬀect
the number of resting zone chondrocytes (data not
shown). Serum estradiol concentration, measured 7 days
after the second injection of estradiol cypionate, was 11 /p5
2 pg/mL, compared to <5 pg/mL in animals treated with
the vehicle. Estrogen treatment did not signiﬁcantly a ﬀect
serum IGF-I concentration (88 /p56 ng/mL vs 108 /p5
6 ng/mL, estrogen vs control, P=NS).
Discussion
We found that the proliferation rate of cells in the resting
zone, both the epiphyseal and reserve regions, decreased
with age. This ﬁnding supports our hypothesis that
the proliferative capacity of the stem-like cells in the
resting zone decreases with age, and thus the stem-like
cells become depleted qualitatively. This decrease in
Figure 5 Effect of dexamethasone on proliferation of chondrocytes
in the overall resting zone (A), and in the epiphyseal region (B),
and the reserve region (C) of the resting zone. 4-week-old rabbits
were treated with dexamethasone (0·5 mg/kg sc daily) or vehicle
(normal saline) for two weeks. BrdU was infused during the
second week of the treatment. BrdU-labeling was assessed
immunohistochemically in the distal femur (DF), proximal tibia
(PT), and distal tibia (DT). P values are for dexamethasone vs
vehicle, ANOVA.
L SCHRIER and others · Depletion of resting zone chondrocytes32
www.endocrinology-journals.orgJournal of Endocrinology (2006) 189, 27–36
proliferative capacity could explain the decreased prolifer-
ation in the proliferative zone chondrocytes which
are thought to be derived from the stem-like cells
(Abad et al. 2002), and thus could also explain the decline
in growth rate with age.
Although we attribute the decrease in proliferation
with age to a decrease in the proliferative capacity, this
decreased capacity is not necessarily cell autonomous and
irreversible. The decrease in proliferative capacity could
be context-dependent, and reversible. Previous studies
suggest that the decrease is not due to hormonal or other
systemic factors (Nilsson & Baron 2004), but the decrease
could reﬂect a local change in concentrations of paracrine
growth factors.
We also found that the number of resting zone
chondrocytes decreased with age in both epiphyseal and
reserve resting zone in the rabbit. Thus quantitative
depletion of resting zone chondrocytes also occurred with
age. This quantitative depletion could explain the reduc-
tion in column density that occurs with growth plate
senescence (Weise et al. 2001), because with age there
would be fewer stem-like cells to generate new columns,
potentially increasing the spacing of the columns in the
proliferative zone. If, with age, the resting zone generates
proliferative columnar clones less often, the proliferative
zone might be populated with older clones, which might
also contribute to the decline in growth rate. Eventually,
with age, the resting zone becomes essentially depleted of
cells, after which time longitudinal bone growth can
presumably only continue until the proliferative capacity
of the existing clones of proliferative chondrocytes is
exhausted. The decline in number of resting zone
chondrocytes could also a ﬀect growth rate by a paracrine
mechanism. For example, a decrease in the number of
resting zone chondrocytes might decrease the overall
production of parathyroid hormone-related protein
(PTHrP), which could lead to earlier hypertrophy of
proliferative zone chondrocytes.
The observed decrease in the number of resting
chondrocytes with age presumably results, at least in part,
from the observed decrease in proliferation of these cells.
However, it is not known whether other factors may also
contribute to this decrease in cell number, for example: an
increase in the rate of cell death with age, an increase in
the number of resting zone chondrocytes exiting to the
proliferative zone, or an increase in the number of resting
zone chondrocytes that hypertrophy and are then replaced
in the secondary ossiﬁcation center.
Previous studies have shown evidence that glucocor-
ticoid excess slows the rate of growth plate senescence.
Figure 6 Effect of dexamethasone treatment on the number of
chondrocytes per millimeter in the overall resting zone (A), and in
the epiphyseal region (B), and the reserve region (C) of the resting
zone. 4-week-old rabbits were treated with dexamethasone
(0·5 mg/kg sc daily) or vehicle (normal saline) for two weeks. The
number of cells per mm of growth plate (measured perpendicular
to the long axis of the bone) was assessed in the distal femur
(DF), proximal tibia (PT), and distal tibia (DT). P values are for
dexamethasone vs vehicle, ANOVA.
Depletion of resting zone chondrocytes · L SCHRIER and others 33
www.endocrinology-journals.org Journal of Endocrinology (2006) 189, 27–36
Consequently, after a period of glucocorticoid-induced
growth inhibition, the growth plates appear less senescent
than expected for age and therefore grow at a greater than
normal rate, causing catch-up growth (Gafni et al. 2001).
To explain the delay in senescence and the ensuing
catch-up growth, we hypothesized that glucocorticoid
excess decreases the proliferation rate in the resting zone,
thus conserving the proliferative capacity of the resting
zone chondrocytes. The data in the current study are
consistent with this hypothesis; dexamethasone decreased
proliferation in both the epiphyseal and the reserve
resting zone.
In addition, dexamethasone-treated animals had more
resting zone chondrocytes than did control animals, indi-
cating that glucocorticoid slows the quantitative depletion
of resting zone cells. This delayed depletion of stem-like
cell in the resting zone could contribute to the slowing
of senescence caused by glucocorticoid excess. This
increased number of resting zone cells occurred despite
decreased proliferation, suggesting that dexamethasone
may slow the transition from resting to proliferative
chondrocytes, thus conserving the pool of stem-like cells.
We did not determine whether cessation of glucocorticoid
treatment causes this transition from resting to prolifer-
ative chondrocytes to accelerate, which could contribute
to catch-up growth.
Estrogen accelerates growth plate senescence (Weise
et al. 2001). To explain this e ﬀect, we hypothesized
that estrogen might accelerate resting zone chondrocyte
proliferation, thus depleting the proliferative capacity
more rapidly, or that estrogen might accelerate the quan-
titative depletion of chondrocytes from the resting zone.
However, estrogen did neither; it decreased proliferation
rate and had no signiﬁcant e ﬀect on cell numbers. Thus,
the mechanism by which estrogen accelerates senescence
remains unclear.
We measured levels of circulating IGF-1. Although the
decrease in serum IGF-1 due to estrogen was not statisti-
cally signiﬁcant, we cannot exclude the possibility that a
decrease in IGF-I might have contributed to the decrease
in proliferation index. Also, we examined the e ﬀect of
estrogen on the growth plate in male rabbits. The e ﬀect
of estrogen might have been di ﬀerent in females; a
sexually dimorphic response to estrogen has been demon-
strated in rat growth plate chondrocytes in vitro (Ekstein
et al. 2005).
Figure 7 Effect of estrogen on proliferation of chondrocytes in the
overall resting zone (A), and in the epiphyseal region (B), and the
reserve region (C) of the resting zone. 4-week-old rabbits were
treated with estradiol cypionate (70 /afii9839g/kg im weekly) or vehicle
(cottonseed oil) for two weeks. BrdU was infused during the
second week of the treatment. BrdU-labeling was assessed
immunohistochemically in the distal femur (DF), proximal tibia
(PT), and distal tibia (DT). P values are for estrogen vs vehicle,
ANOVA.
L SCHRIER and others · Depletion of resting zone chondrocytes34
www.endocrinology-journals.orgJournal of Endocrinology (2006) 189, 27–36
We speculate that estrogen might increase the loss of
proliferative capacity that occurs with each cell cycle, or
that estrogen might cause loss of proliferative capacity by
a cell-cycle-independent mechanism. For example, if
senescence is caused by epigenetic changes such as loss of
DNA methylation with each cell cycle (Nilsson et al.
2005), then estrogen might act by decreasing expression of
maintenance methylases, causing greater loss of methyla-
tion with each cell replication. The e ﬀects of estrogen on
the resting zone chondrocytes could be mediated by the
estrogen receptor-/afii9825or -/afii9826, both of which are expressed by
resting zone chondrocytes in humans, rabbits, and rats
(Nilsson et al. 2002, Nilsson et al. 2003). The combination
of a decreased rate of growth (in most mammals) and an
increased rate of senescence seems to be an e ﬀect speciﬁc
to estrogen (De Luca & Baron 1999). Other growth-
inhibiting conditions, such as glucocorticoid excess (Gafni
et al. 2001) and hypothyroidism (Marino et al. 2005),
decelerate growth plate senescence. The mechanism
responsible for this paradoxical e ﬀect of estrogen remains
to be determined.
In our study, we focused on the e ﬀects of estrogen on
the resting zone and on growth plate senescence. How-
ever, estrogen may also act elsewhere in the growth plate
to hasten epiphyseal fusion by other mechanisms. For
example, estrogen may act on hypertrophic chondrocytes
to stimulate fusion (Kennedy et al. 1999, Nilsson et al.
2002). In addition, signals other than estrogen may
contribute to fusion, including ﬁbroblast growth factors,
(Sobue et al. 2005, Ornitz 2001), parathyroid hormone-
related protein (Schipani et al. 1997), and insulin receptor
substrate-1 (Hoshi et al. 2004).
Although it was not one of the original aims of the
study, we also observed that the proliferation rate of
reserve resting zone chondrocytes was greater than the
proliferation rate of epiphyseal resting zone chondrocytes
at all ages studied except for 0 weeks of age. This ﬁnding
supports the idea that the reserve chondrocytes represent
a transition zone between the epiphyseal chondrocytes,
which proliferate very slowly, and the proliferative
chondrocytes, which proliferate rapidly. This concept is
intuitively appealing in that the reserve region lies physi-
cally between the epiphyseal region and the proliferative
zone. In addition, the reserve region contains pairs of
ﬂattened cells that give the appearance of nascent prolifer-
ative columns. Finally, the concept is supported by
functional studies; after surgical ablation, the reserve
region can apparently be regenerated by epiphyseal
chondrocytes, and the proliferative zone can apparently be
generated by reserve chondrocytes (Abad et al. 2002).
In conclusion, our ﬁndings support the hypotheses that
growth plate senescence is caused by qualitative and
quantitative depletion of stem-like cells in the resting
zone. Our ﬁndings further suggest that growth-inhibiting
conditions, such as glucocorticoid excess, slow senescence
by slowing resting zone proliferation and slowing the
numerical depletion of stem-like cells, thereby conserving
the proliferative capacity of the growth plate. Estrogen
appears to accelerate growth plate senescence without
accelerating resting zone chondrocyte proliferation or
accelerating the numerical depletion of these cells, sug-
gesting that it might accelerate senescence by a
proliferation-independent mechanism or by increasing the
loss of proliferative capacity per cell cycle.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. John Bacher for performing the required
surgical procedures. This research was supported by the
Intramural Research Program of the National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, NIH. The
authors declare that there is no conﬂict of interest that
would prejudice the impartiality of this scientiﬁc work.
References
Abad V, Meyers JL, Weise M, Gafni RI, Barnes KM, Nilsson O,
Bacher JD & Baron J 2002 The role of the resting zone in growth
plate chondrogenesis. Endocrinology 143 1851–1857.
D eL u c aF&B aron J 1999 Control of bone growth by ﬁbroblast
growth factors. Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism 10 61–65.
Ekstein J, Nasatzky E, Boyan BD, Orno y A & Schwartz Z 2005
Growth-plate chondrocytes respond to 17 /afii9826-estradiol with
sex-speciﬁc increases in IP3 and intracellular calcium ion signalling
via a capacitative entry mechanism. Steroids 70 775–786.
Farnum CE & Wilsman NJ 1987 Morphologic stages of the terminal
hypertrophic chondrocyte of growth plate cartilage. Anatomical
Record 219 221–232.
FarquharsonC&L o v eridge N 1990 Cell proliferation within the
growth plate of long bones assessed by bromodeoxyuridine uptake
and its relationship to glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity.
Bone and Mineral 10 121–130.
Gafni RI, Weise M, Robrecht DT, Meyers JL, Barnes KM, De-Levi S
& Baron J 2001 Catch-up growth is associated with delayed
senescence of the growth plate in rabbits. Pediatric Research
50 618–623.
Gafni RI, McCarthy EF, Hatcher T, Meyers JL, Inoue N, Reddy C,
Weise M, Barnes KM, Aba dV&B a r o nJ2 0 0 2R e c o v e r y
from osteoporosis through skeletal growth: early bone mass
acquisition has little e ﬀect on adult bone density. FASEB Journal
16 736–738.
Hoshi K, Ogata N, Shimoaka T, Terauchi Y, Kadowaki T, Kenmotsu S-I,
Chung UI, Ozawa H, Nakamur aK&K a w aguchi H 2004
Deﬁciency of insulin receptor substrate-1 impairs skeletal growth
through early closure of epiphyseal cartilage. Journal of Bone and
Mineral Research 19 214–223.
Hunziker EB & Schenk RK 1989 Physiological mechanisms adopted
by chondrocytes in regulating longitudinal bone growth in rats.
Journal of Physiology 414 55–71.
Kember NF 1973 Aspects of the maturation process in growth
cartilage in the rat tibia. Clinical Orthopedics and Related Research
95 288–294.
Kember NF & Walker KV 1971 Control of bone growth in rats.
Nature 229 428–429.
Kennedy J, Baris C, Hoyland JA, Selby PL, Freemont AJ & Braidman IP
1999 Immunoﬂuorescent localization of estrogen receptor- /afii9825in
growth plates of rabbits, but not in rats, at sexual maturity. Bone
24 9–16.
Depletion of resting zone chondrocytes · L SCHRIER and others 35
www.endocrinology-journals.org Journal of Endocrinology (2006) 189, 27–36
Marino R, Hegde AA, Nilsson O, Barnes KM, Emons JAM, Schrier L
& Baron J 2005 Catch-up growth after transient hypothyroidism is
associated with delayed growth plate senescence. Proceedings of the
87th Annual Meeting of the Endocrine Society , pp 220. San Diego,
California, USA.
Masoud I, Shapir o F & Moses A 1986 a Tibial epiphyseal
development: a cross-sectional histologic and histomorphometric
study in the New Zealand white rabbit. Journal of Orthopedic
Research 4 212–220.
Masoud I, Shapiro F, Ken tR&M o s e sA1 9 8 6 b A longitudinal study
of the growth of the New Zealand white rabbit: cumulative and
biweekly incremental growth rates for body length, body weight,
femoral length, and tibial length. Journal of Orthopedic Research
4 221–231.
National Research Council 2003 Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals . National Academy Press: Washington, DC,
USA.
NilssonO&B a r o nJ2 0 0 4 Fundamental limits on longitudinal bone
growth: growth plate senescence and epiphyseal fusion. Trends in
Endocrinology and Metabolism 15 370–374.
Nilsson O, Abad V, Chrysis D, Ritzen EM, Savendah lL&B aron J
2002 Estrogen receptor-alpha and -beta are expressed throughout
postnatal development in the rat and rabbit growth plate. Journal of
Endocrinology 173 407–414.
Nilsson O, Chrysis D, Pajulo O, Boman A, Holst M, Rubinstein J,
Ritzen EM & Savendahl L 2003 Localization of estrogen
receptors-alpha and -beta and androgen receptor in the human
growth plate at di ﬀerent pubertal stages. Journal of Endocrinology
177 319–326.
Nilsson O, Mitchum Jr RD, Schrier L, Ferns SP, Barnes KM,
Troendle JF & Baron J 2005 Growth plate senescence is associated
with loss of DNA methylation. Journal of Endocrinology 186
241–249.
Ornitz DM 2001 Regulation of chondrocyte growth and
diﬀerentiation by ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 3. Novartis
Foundation Symposium 232 272–282.
Schipani E, Lanske B, Hunzelman J, Luz A, Kovacs CS, Lee K, Pirro A,
Kronenberg HM & Juppner H 1997 T argeted expression of
constitutively active receptors for parathyroid hormone and
parathyroid hormone-related peptide delays endochondral bone
formation and rescues mice that lack parathyroid hormone-related
peptide. PNAS 94 13689–13694.
Sobue T, Naganawa T, Xiao L, Okada Y, T anaka Y, Ito M, Okimoto N,
Nakamura T, Co ﬃn JD & Hurley MM 2005 Over-expression of
ﬁbroblast growth factor-2 causes defective bone mineralization and
osteopenia in transgenic mice. Journal of Cellular Biochemistry
95 83–94.
T anner JM & Davies PS 1985 Clinical longitudinal standards for
height and height velocity for North American children. Journal of
Pediatrics 107 317–329.
Walker KV & Kember NF 1972 a Cell kinetics of growth cartilage in
the rat tibia. I. Measurements in young male rats. Cell and Tissue
Kinetics 5 401–408.
Walker KV & Kember NF 1972 b Cell kinetics of growth cartilage in
the rat tibia. II. Measurements during ageing. Cell and Tissue
Kinetics 5 409–419.
Weise M, De-Levi S, Barnes KM, Gafni RI, Aba dV&B a r o nJ2 0 0 1
Eﬀects of estrogen on growth plate senescence and epiphyseal
fusion. PNAS 98 6871–6876.
Received in ﬁnal form 27 December 2005
Accepted 5 January 2006
Made available online as an Accepted Preprint
11 January 2006
L SCHRIER and others · Depletion of resting zone chondrocytes36
www.endocrinology-journals.orgJournal of Endocrinology (2006) 189, 27–36