Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Dnmt1 determines bone length by regulating
energy metabolism of growth plate
chondrocytes
Yuta Yanagihara1, Masatomo Takahashi 2, Yoshihiro Izumi 2,
Tomofumi Kinoshita3, Masaki Takao3,T a k e s h iB a m b a2 &Y u u k iI m a i1,4
Chondrocytes differentiated from mesenchymal stem cells play a role in
determining skeletal patterns by ossiﬁcation. However, the mechanism by
which maintenance DNA methylation in chondrocytes regulates differentia-
tion and skeletal formation is unclear. In the Musculoskeletal Knowledge
Portal, Dnmt1 is signiﬁcantly associated with Height. Long bones in Dnmt1-
deﬁcient (Dnmt1ΔPrx1) mouse limbs are signiﬁcantly shortened due to decreased
chondrocyte proliferationand accelerated differentiation. Integrated analysis
of RNA-Seq and MBD-Seq reveals that reduced DNA methylation in Dnmt1ΔPrx1
chondrocytes leads to increased expression of genes related to energy meta-
bolism and to ossiﬁcation. Metabolomic analyses conﬁrm that Dnmt1ΔPrx1
chondrocytes had increased levels of nearly all energy metabolites. These
results indicate that Dnmt1-mediated maintenance of DNA methylation gov-
erns chondrocyte differentiation by regulating energy metabolism through
both gene expression and modulation of metabolite supplies. Taken together,
this study suggests that appropriate DNA methylation status in chondrocytes
can orchestrate growth plate mineralization and subsequently determine bone
length.
Chondrocytes are involved in the formation of cartilage and play a
pivotal role in the development of the skeletal system. The formation
of skeletal elements, including long bones, occurs through endo-
chondral ossiﬁcation when mesenchymal stem cells differentiate into
chondrocytes that then form an anlage of cartilage. The cartilage
anlage serves as a scaffold for bone formation. Chondrocytes within
the cartilage matrix secrete extracellular matrix components, includ-
ing collagen and proteoglycans. As chondrocytes mature and undergo
hypertrophy, they begin to mineralize the surrounding matrix. Ulti-
mately, the hypertrophic cartilage is replaced by bone tissue, which
contributes to longitudinal bone growth. This chondrocyte differ-
entiation process is essential for the development, growth, and
maintenance of the skeletal system1.
Epigenetics involves the regulation of gene expression without
altering the genomic DNA sequence. During cell differentiation, epi-
genetic modiﬁcations such as DNA methylation, histone modiﬁcations,
and chromatin remodeling dynamically regulate the accessibility of
transcriptional machinery to gene loci2.E p i g e n e t i cm e c h a n i s m sp l a ya
c r u c i a lr o l ei nc e l ld i f f e r e n t i a t i o na n dd e v e l o p m e n t .I np a r t i c u l a r ,D N A
methylation maintenance is an epigenome-supporting system that
reconstructs histone modiﬁcations and chromatin structure in post-
mitotic cells through inheritance of DNA methylation 3. The DNA
methylation maintenance system comprises two key molecules:
Ubiquitin-like containing PHD and RING ﬁnger domains 1 (Uhrf1) and
DNA methyl transferase 1 (Dnmt1). During DNA replication, Uhrf1
recognizes hemimethylated DNA and recruits Dnmt1, which
Received: 10 July 2024
Accepted: 2 October 2025
Check for updates
1Division of Integrative Pathophysiology, Proteo-Science Center, PIAS, Ehime University, Toon, Ehime, Japan.2Division of Metabolomics, Medical Research
Center for High Depth Omics, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.3Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Ehime University
Graduate School of Medicine, Toon, Ehime, Japan.4Department of Pathophysiology, Ehime University Graduate School of Medicine, Toon, Ehime, Japan.
e-mail: y-imai@m.ehime-u.ac.jp
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
methylates the replicated DNA strand. DNA methylation in the vicinity
of the transcription start site is known to suppress gene expression4.
As we previously reported, Uhrf1 regulates limb growth through
control of gene expression 5. Uhrf1 has various domains and diverse
functions, including maintaining DNA methylation as well as de novo
methylation and genomic DNA stability6,7. However, the relationship
between bone growth and mechanisms of Dnmt1, the main DNA
methyltransferase involved in DNA methylation maintenance,
remained unclear. Dnmt1 was previously reported to be involved in
knee osteoarthritis (OA) and mineralization of periodontal ligament
cells and mesenchymal cells8–11, but the function of Dnmt1 in skeletal
formation, particularly in chondrocytes, is also unclear. Here, we show
that Dnmt1 regulates not only gene expression but also energy meta-
bolism, which is involved in the mineralization of cartilage and the
consequent determination of bone length.
Results
Lack of growth of long bones in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice after birth
To elucidate the role of Dnmt1 in the skeletal system, weﬁrst used the
Musculoskeletal Knowledge Portal (MSK-KP) to assess the gene-level
association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the DNMT1
gene locus. The most signi ﬁcant correlation was with Height
(P value < 4.2e−35;F i g .1A). Therefore, we generated mice with condi-
tional knockout of Dnmt1 that was speciﬁc to limb mesenchymal cells
(Dnmt1ΔPrx1) by crossing Prrx1-Cre mice with Dnmt1 ﬂoxed mice and
analyzing the effects ofDnmt1 knockout on skeletal formation. Skeletal
preparations from neonatal control ( Dnmt1ﬂox)m i c ea n d Dnmt1ΔPrx1
mice showed that both genotypes had mineralized bone and cartilage
tissue in the limbs (Fig.1B). However, the joints ofDnmt1ΔPrx1 mice had a
poorly formed cartilage matrix at 1 week after birth (Fig. 1C). Short-
ening of long bones in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice was observed from birth, and
these differences became more pronounced during the ﬁrst several
weeks of life (Supplementary Fig. 1A). Since sex differences in bone
length were not observed at the relatively mature age of 6 weeks
(Supplementary Fig. 1B), we used both male and female mice together
to analyze the function of Dnmt1 in sex-independent skeletal devel-
opment. The percentage of bone length in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice relative to
Dnmt1ﬂox mice decreased with age (1 week old, 62.4% (Fig.1D); 2 weeks
old, 60.6% (Supplementary Fig. 1C); 3 weeks old, 52.9% (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 1D); 6 weeks old, 37.4–42.4% (Fig. 1E, F, S1B)). When the mice
w e r e1 6w e e k so l dt h eb o n el e n g t ho fDnmt1ΔPrx1 mice was less than half
(44.7%) that of Dnmt1ﬂox mice (Supplementary Fig. 1E). Thus, the long
bones of Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice showed little elongation, and the differences
in bone length became more pronounced as the mice aged. These
differences persisted into adulthood. These data indicated that Dnmt1
plays a more important role in longitudinal bone growth in the post-
natal than the embryonic developmental stage.
Prrx1-Cre mice express Cre recombinase from limb mesenchymal
cells that differentiate into osteoblasts and chondrocytes. To conﬁrm
whether long bone phenotype differences seen inDnmt1ΔPrx1 mice are
derived from osteoblasts or chondrocytes, we generated osteoblast-
and chondrocyte-speciﬁc Dnmt1-deﬁcient mice using Osx-Cre and
Col2a1-Cre mice, respectively. The Osx-cre; Dnmt1 ﬂox/ﬂox mice survived
to adulthood. However, the number of Col2a1-Cre; Dnmt1 ﬂox/ﬂox mice
that survived to adulthood was substantially lower and the birth rates
of these mice were very low and did not follow Mendel ’s laws
Fig. 1 | Mice with Dnmt1 knockout speciﬁc to limb mesenchymal cells exhibit
signiﬁcant limb shortening. A Gene-level association of single-nucleotide poly-
morphisms in the DNMT1 gene locus obtained from the Musculoskeletal Knowl-
edge Portal (MSK-KP). -log10(p) values from two-sided MAGMA gene analysis (FDR
corrected).B Skeletal preparations (Alcian Blue/Alizarin Red) of neonatalDnmt1ﬂox
(left) and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 (right) mice. C Higher magniﬁcation images of skeletal pre-
parations of forelimbs (upper panels) and hindlimbs (lower panels).D Length of
tibiae from 1-week-old Dnmt1ﬂox (n =7 )a n dDnmt1ΔPrx1(n = 7) mice. E µCT images of
tibiae from 6-week-old Dnmt1ﬂox and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice. F Length of tibiae from 6-
week-old Dnmt1ﬂox (n = 15) and Dnmt1ΔPrx1(n = 13) mice. B, C, E Representative data
from at least three individual mice are shown.D, F Data are mean ± s.d. Signiﬁcance
of mean differences was assessed using unpaired two-sided t-tests. Source data are
provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 2
(Supplementary Fig. 1F). Osx-Cre; Dnmt1 ﬂox/ﬂox mice showed no differ-
ence in bone length compared to Cre-controls (Supplementary
Fig. 1G), whereas Col2a1-Cre; Dnmt1 ﬂox/ﬂox mice showed signi ﬁcant
shortening (67.1%) compared to Col2a1-Cre; Dnmt1 ﬂox/+ mice (Supple-
mentary Fig. 1H). These results strongly suggest that the skeletal
phenotype of Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice has a chondrocyte origin. As mentioned
above, Col2a1-cre; Dnmt1ﬂox/ﬂox mice are challenging to analyze due to
their low survival rates. As such, subsequent analyses involved
Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice.
Accelerated differentiation inDnmt1ΔPrx1 growth plates
Growth plate cartilage is important for longitudinal bone elongation.
Here, we performed histological analyses to determine whether Dnmt1
is expressed in growth plate cartilage. Immunohistochemical staining
revealed that expression of both Dnmt1 and Uhrf1 localized to chon-
drocytes in the proliferative zone, where bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)-
positive cells of controlDnmt1ﬂox mice are seen. In contrast,Dnmt1ΔPrx1
mice had signiﬁcantly lower Uhrf1 expression relative toDnmt1ﬂox mice,
and essentially no Dnmt1 expression (Fig.2A–D). These results indicate
that Dnmt1 functions mainly in the proliferative chondrocytes of
growth plate cartilage and that Prrx1-Cre-mediated conditional
knockout effectively reduced Dnmt1 expression in the limbs. Safranin
O/Fast green staining of cartilage tissue revealed that the proliferative
cartilage area in the proximal tibia was signi ﬁcantly smaller in
Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice compared toDnmt1ﬂox mice at 1 week of age (Fig.2E, F).
The population of BrdU-positive cells in growth plate cartilage was
signiﬁcantly lower in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice than in control Dnmt1ﬂox mice
(Supplementary Fig. 2A, B), while the hypertrophic cartilage area and
mineralized area were signiﬁcantly wider (Fig. 2E, F, G). At 6 weeks of
age, Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice exhibited a loss of growth plates and trabecular
bones, and a marked delay in the formation of secondary ossiﬁcation
centers in the proximal tibia (Fig.2H, I). The controlDnmt1ﬂox mice had
slow progression of growth plate calci ﬁcation, and sequential μCT
images did not exhibit trabecular bone until the mice were 6 weeks old
(Supplementary Fig. 3A, upper panel). On the other hand, Dnmt1ΔPrx1
mice had signiﬁcant calciﬁcation of both growth plates and trabecular
bones beginning as early as 1 week of age, and calci ﬁed trabecular
structures had disappeared when the mice were 6 weeks old (Sup-
plementary Fig. 3A, lower panel). Trabecular bone formation is
dependent on proper osteoclast/chondroclast and osteoblast func-
tion. As such, we carried out immunohistochemical staining for
osteoclast and osteoblast markers using tibiae from 2-week-old mice.
The area of Osterix (Osx)-positive staining did not differ between
Dnmt1ﬂox mice and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice, but the area of Cathepsin K (Ctsk)-
positive osteoclasts was signi ﬁcantly larger in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice com-
pared to Dnmt1ﬂox mice (Supplementary Fig. 3B, C). Due to the
increased percentage of osteoclasts inDnmt1ΔPrx1 mice, we stained for
receptor activator of NFκB ligand (Rankl), an inducer of osteoclasto-
genesis, and Osteoprotegerin (Opg), its decoy receptor of Rankl. In the
vicinity of primary trabecular bone in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice, expression of
both Rankl and Opg appeared to be increased compared to Dnmt1ﬂox
mice, but much of the Rankl inDnmt1ΔPrx1 mice did not co-localize with
Opg (Supplementary Fig. 3D). These results indicated that Rankl
secretion near primary trabecular bone was increased in Dnmt1ΔPrx1
mice with advanced chondrocyte differentiation, followed by
enhancement of osteoclastogenesis. In general, bone elongation is
maintained by a balance between the proliferative and hypertrophic
cartilage zones. These ﬁndings suggest that Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice have a
disruption in the balance of cartilage proliferation as well as differ-
entiation/calciﬁcation and its resorption that causes bone length
shortening and loss of growth plates.
Dnmt1 deﬁciency enhanced chondrocyte mineralization
To investigate the molecular basis for the Dnmt1ΔPrx1 phenotype, we
evaluated the differentiation and proliferation of primary cultured
chondrocytes obtained from neonatal Dnmt1ﬂox and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice.
Primary cultured chondrocytes were used for monolayer cultures
(Fig. 3 and Supplementary Fig. 4) and micromass cultures (Supple-
mentary Fig. 5). Gene expression levels of Dnmt1 in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chon-
drocytes were signi ﬁcantly lower regardless of the presence or
absence of Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) (Supplementary
Fig. 4A). Levels of Dnmt1 protein were also signi ﬁcantly lower (Sup-
plementary Fig. 4B, C) in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes relative toDnmt1ﬂox
chondrocytes. Along with the Dnmt1 deﬁciency, gene expression levels
of Uhrf1 and Ten-eleven translocation (Tet1/2/3) DNA demethylases
were also decreased in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice (Supplementary Fig. 4A). Pro-
liferation of chondrocytes derived from Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice was sig-
niﬁcantly slower than that for Dnmt1ﬂox chondrocytes (Supplementary
Fig. 4D, E). Moreover, Alcian Blue staining indicated a notable reduc-
tion in cartilage matrix synthesis in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes (Fig.3A).
On the other hand, consistent with in vivo observations (Fig. 2G),
mineralization was accelerated in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes (Fig. 3B).
These in vitro results support the in vivoﬁndings that Dnmt1 regulates
both cell proliferation and differentiation. To verify chondrocyte dif-
ferentiation at the cellular level, real-time RT-PCR was performed using
primary cultured chondrocytes that were or were not stimulated with
BMP2. In Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes, gene expression levels ofCol2a1,a
marker of early chondrocyte differentiation, were signi ﬁcantly
decreased, and gene expression of late markers such as Runt-related
transcription factor 2(Runx2)a n dMatrix metalloproteinase-13(Mmp13)
was signiﬁcantly increased before BMP2 treatment. Genes related to
osteoblast differentiation and calci ﬁcation, such as Osterix (Osx),
Alkaline phosphatase(Alp), Osteopontin (Opn), and Osteocalcin (Ocn),
were also signiﬁcantly increased in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes (Fig. 3C).
Since cartilage calciﬁcation is known to be accompanied by apoptosis,
we performed TUNEL staining 12–14. As previously reported, hypercal-
ciﬁcation inDnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes was accompanied by an increased
population of apoptotic cells (Supplementary Fig. 4F, G). Micromass
culture showed expression levels of genes related to DNA methylation
maintenance that were similar to those in monolayer cultures (Sup-
plementary Fig. 5A). Although the gene and protein expression levels
of the early chondrogenic differentiation markerCol2a1 were reduced
in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 (Supplementary Fig. 5A–C), the late marker genes Runx2
and Mmp13 were similar betweenDnmt1ﬂox and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 in micromass
cultured chondrocytes (Supplementary Fig. 5A). Expression levels of
genes related to osteoblast differentiation and calci ﬁcation showed
similar trends to those seen for monolayer cultures (Supplementary
Fig. 5A). In particular, Ocn expression levels were enhanced in
Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes, even at the protein level (Supplementary
Fig. 5B, C). Re ﬂecting these results, reduced cartilage matrix produc-
tion capacity and increased calci ﬁcation were also observed in
micromass-culturedDnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes by Alcian blue, toluidine
blue, and alizarin red staining (Supplementary Fig. 5D–F). These data
suggested that Dnmt1 de ﬁciency in primary cultured chondrocytes,
regardless of the culture method, was associated with dysregulated
proliferation, differentiation, and mineralization, which correspond to
the deﬁciencies in long bone formation seen for Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice.
Dnmt1 regulates genes for proliferation and chondrogenesis
To identify mechanisms that may cause the observed phenotypes, we
next comprehensively explored the gene expression proﬁle of Dnmt1-
deﬁcient chondrocytes by RNA-Seq using primary cultured chon-
drocytes that were or were not treated with BMP2. To verify that gene
expression proﬁles were altered by Dnmt1 de ﬁciency during chon-
drocyte differentiation, weﬁrst compared the expression of genes that
had signiﬁcant decreases or increases in expression in the presence of
BMP2 treatment for each mouse genotype. BMP2 treatment down-
regulated the expression levels of 673 and 1054 genes inDnmt1ﬂox and
in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes, respectively (Fig. 3D). Among these,
expression of 733 genes was speci ﬁcally decreased by Dnmt1
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 3
deﬁciency. Enrichment analysis of these 733 genes revealed an
enrichment in genes related to cell cycle (Fig. 3E). Upregulated
expression in the presence of BMP2 treatment was seen for 2070 and
1115 genes in Dnmt1ﬂox and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes, respectively
(Fig. 3D). Of these, expression of 612 genes was speciﬁcally increased
by Dnmt1 deﬁciency, and enrichment analysis revealed genes involved
in ossiﬁcation and skeletal system development (Fig.3F). These results
further corroborate the phenotypes observed in vivo and in vitro and
suggest that Dnmt1 comprehensively orchestrates gene expression
proﬁles associated with chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation.
Fig. 2 | Narrowed proliferative cartilage layer and promotion of chondrocyte
hypertrophy and mineralization associated with Dnmt1 deﬁciency.
A Immunohistochemistry for DAPI (Blue), Dnmt1 (Red) and Uhrf1 (Green) in the
proliferative zone (PZ) of the proximal tibial growth plate from 1-week-oldDnmt1ﬂox
(top row) and Dnmt1ΔPrx1(bottom row) mice. B Quantiﬁcation of Dnmt1 and Uhrf1
expression in the PZ of growth plate chondrocytes from Dnmt1ﬂox (n = 6) and
Dnmt1ΔPrx1(n =6 )m i c e .C, D Immunohistochemistry of DAPI (Blue), BrdU (Red) and
(C)D n m t 1o r(D) Uhrf1 (Green) in proximal tibiae from 1-week-old mice.E Safranin
O/Fast green staining of proximal tibiae from 1-week-old mice; right panels show a
higher magniﬁcation of the boxed areas in the left panels, showing the PZ and
Hypertrophic zone (HZ) in growth plate cartilage.F Quantiﬁcation of the area of PZ
and HZ in growth plate cartilage layers in proximal tibiae fromDnmt1ﬂox (n =7 )a n d
Dnmt1ΔPrx1 (n =7 )m i c ei n(E). G Von Kossa staining of proximal tibiae from 1-week-
old mice.H Safranin O/Fast green staining of proximal tibiae from 6-week-old mice.
I µCT images of tibiae from 6-week-old mice.A, C–E, G–I Representative data from
at least three individual mice are shown. All data are mean ± s.d. Signi ﬁcance of
mean differences was assessed using unpaired two-sided t-tests. Source data are
provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 4
Dnmt1 directly regulates energy metabolism-related genes
DNA methylation is a repressor of gene expression, and thus loss of
Dnmt1 would be expected to decrease DNA methylation levels and
increase gene expression. Therefore, to identify genes directly regu-
lated by Dnmt1, we focused on those genes that were more highly
expressed in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes than in Dnmt1ﬂox chondrocytes
before and after induction of differentiation by BMP2. A principal
component analysis (PCA) to compare Dnmt1ﬂox and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chon-
drocytes in the presence or absence of BMP2 showed disparate gene
expression proﬁles for cells from Dnmt1ﬂox and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice (Sup-
plementary Fig. 6A, B). Subsequent expression analyses visualized by
volcano plots showed upregulated expression of multiple genes in
Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes compared to Dnmt1ﬂox, regardless of BMP2
treatment (Fig. 4A, B). However, it is presumed that a signi ﬁcant
number of genes were upregulated due to indirect factors. Thus, to
clarify genome-wide changes in DNA methylation status associated
with Dnmt1 deﬁciency and to comprehensively analyze transcriptional
regulation by DNA methylation, we next isolated methylated DNA from
primary cultured chondrocytes obtained from Dnmt1ﬂox and
Dnmt1ΔPrx1mice without BMP2 treatment. The methylated DNA was
then subjected to next-generation sequencing (MBD-seq). The amount
of methylated DNA collected using methyl CpG binding domain pro-
tein 2 (MBD2) beads was signi ﬁcantly lower for Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chon-
drocytes than for Dnmt1ﬂox chondrocytes (Fig.4C) and the peak count
frequency of the transcription start site (TSS) region of methylated
DNA was also signiﬁcantly lower in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes (Fig. 4D).
This result is consistent with the ﬁnding that Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes
had a higher number of upregulated genes than downregulated genes
compared to the control Dnmt1ﬂox chondrocytes (Fig. 4A, B). To
ascertain the loci of Dnmt1-mediated methylated DNA, we performed
Fig. 3 | Decreased extracellular matrix production and cell cycle and acceler-
ated mineralization ofDnmt1-deﬁcient chondrocytes. AAlcian Blue staining for
quantitative evaluation of cartilage matrix synthesis activity in primary cultured
chondrocytes obtained fromDnmt1ﬂox (n =4 )a n dDnmt1ΔPrx1 (n =3 )m i c e .B Alizarin
Red staining for quantitative analysis of mineralization activity of primary cultured
chondrocytes obtained fromDnmt1ﬂox (n =3 )a n dDnmt1ΔPrx1 (n =3 )m i c e .
C Expression levels of genes related to chondrogenesis, mineralization and
osteoblast differentiation inDnmt1ﬂox (n =3 )a n dDnmt1ΔPrx1 (n = 3) chondrocytes
with and without BMP2 treatment.D Volcano plots of RNA-Seq data fromDnmt1ﬂox
(upper panel) and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 (lower panel) chondrocytes with and without BMP2
treatment. The plots were generated automatically using RaNA-seq, and the vertical
axis displays the P values prior to adjustment.E Left panel: Venn diagram of genes
that had downregulated expression during differentiation ofDnmt1ﬂox (Light blue
dashed line) and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 (Light blue solid line) chondrocytes. Right panel:
Enrichment analysis of speciﬁc downregulated genes (733 genes) during differ-
entiation of Dnmt1ΔPrx1chondrocytes shows increased expression of genes asso-
ciated with the cell cycle.F Left panel: Venn diagram of genes that were upregulated
during differentiation ofDnmt1ﬂox (Pink dashed line) andDnmt1ΔPrx1 (Pink solid line)
chondrocytes. Right panel: Enrichment analysis ofDnmt1ΔPrx1-speciﬁcu p r e g u l a t e d
genes (612 genes) during differentiation ofDnmt1ΔPrx1chondrocytes shows
increased expression of genes associated with the extracellular matrix.A–C Data
are mean ± s.d. Signiﬁcance of mean differences was assessed using unpaired t-tests
or Tukey’s post hoc tests with two-tailedP values. E, F Enrichment analysisP values
were calculated with Metascape. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 5
MACS2 peak calling usingDnmt1ﬂox chondrocytes as the treatment and
Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes as the control. Genes with a peak within 10 kb
upstream of the TSS were then extracted as genes having DNA
methylation that was regulated in a Dnmt1-dependent manner. These
analyses identi ﬁed 14,751 gene loci that were targets of Dnmt1-
mediated methylation (Fig. 4E). Combining this result with the RNA-
Seq data, we investigated the upregulated genes in Dnmt1ΔPrx1
chondrocytes that overlapped with methylated DNA peaks associated
with Dnmt1 activity in chondrocytes that were and were not treated
with BMP2 to identify genes that are direct targets of Dnmt1 methy-
lation. To extract genes more closely related to DNA hypomethylation,
RNA-Seq data were compared to Dnmt1ﬂox with a focus on genes that
were signiﬁcantly upregulated in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes with log 2
fold change (FC) ≥ 1 and gene expression levels in Dnmt1ﬂox
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 6
chondrocytes that were higher th an the median value. After this
selection, 512 and 875 genes had upregulated expression before and
after BMP2 treatment, respectively (Fig.4A, B). Next, we searched for
genes that were commonly identiﬁed across the 14,751 genes extracted
by MBD-Seq and the 512 and 875 genes identi ﬁed by RNA-seq. We
found 123 upregulated genes with Dnmt1-mediated peaks within 10 kb
of the TSS (Fig. 4E). These genes are upregulated in response to the
loss of Dnmt1, which leads to a reduction in DNA methylation. To
investigate the functions and pathways associated with these 123
genes, we performed gene enrichment analysis. The results revealed
that these genes are signiﬁcantly enriched in pathways related to the
immune system, calciﬁcation, and catabolic processes (Fig. 4F). Fur-
thermore, all of the RNA-Seq results includedNocturnin (Noct), Solute
carrier family 38 member 6 (Slc38a6), RAB3 GTPase activating protein
catalytic subunit 1 (Rab3gap1), and Sirtuin 5 (Sirt5), which are all
reported to be involved in energy metabolism (Fig. 4G)15–20.N o c ti s
phosphatase which catalyzes the conversion of NADP+ to NAD+ and of
NADPH to NADH. Slc38a6 is a glutamate transporter and is highly
expressed in neurons. Rab3gap1 works as GTPase-activator, and Sirt5 is
a deacetylase that works in an NAD-dependent manner and is localized
to mitochondria. These genes showed very high log2 FC values of 4-8
or higher in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 compared to Dnmt1ﬂox chondrocytes (Fig. 4H).
Indeed, the magnitude of the methylated DNA peaks around the TSS of
these genes was reduced in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes (Fig. 4I). These
results suggest that Dnmt1-mediated methylation directly regulates
the expression of genes involved in energy metabolism.
Genes related to chondrocyte differentiation and energy meta-
bolism were also upregulated in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 cartilage
Next, to conﬁrm that the results obtained in vitro are consistent with
those obtained in vivo, RNA-Seq was performed using cartilage
obtained from the knee joints of P5 mice. According to a PCA, gene
expression proﬁles differed between Dnmt1ﬂox and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 even
in vivo (Supplementary Fig. 6C). A volcano plot showed that the
number of genes that were signiﬁcantly upregulated inDnmt1ΔPrx1 was
greater than the number of genes with downregulated expression,
which is also consistent with the trend seen in vitro (Supplementary
Fig. 6D). In vivo RNA-Seq also showed that expression ofNoct, Slc38a6,
Rab3gap1,a n d Sirt5 was signi ﬁcantly and dramatically increased in
Dnmt1ΔPrx1 relative to Dnmt1ﬂox (Fig. 4H).
The log 2 FC values for Dnmt1ΔPrx1 were compared to those for
Dnmt1ﬂox to generate a heatmap for each relevant marker. Results for
in vitro and in vivo experiments both demonstrated an increase in the
expression of genes associated with calciﬁcation, includingPthlh, Osx,
and Ocn, as well as genes related to osteoclast differentiation, such as
Csf1, and genes related to oxidative phosphorylation (Supplementary
Fig. 6E). These in vivo ﬁndings suggest that Dnmt1 plays a compre-
hensive role in regulating normal cartilage differentiation and energy
metabolism, again supporting the in vitro data.
Dnmt1 regulates calciﬁcation via energy metabolism
We next explored whether the loss of Dnmt1 affects the energy
metabolism of chondrocytes. First, glutamine uptake and mitochon-
drial metabolism were measured to assess the TCA cycle. Glutamine
uptake was downregulated in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes compared to
Dnmt1ﬂox chondrocytes (Fig. 5A), whereas mitochondrial metabolism
was markedly elevated in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes (Fig.5B). Enhanced
mitochondrial metabolism was also observed in Dnmt1ﬂox chon-
drocytes treated with two types of s iDnmt1 (Supplementary Fig. 7A).
Both siRNAs used in this mitochondrial metabolism assay sufﬁciently
suppressed Dnmt1 expression (Supplementary Fig. 7B). Meanwhile, in
BMSCs, mitochondrial metabolism did not differ between Dnmt1ﬂox
and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 (Supplementary Fig. 7C). These results support a critical
function for Dnmt1 in chondrocytes, but not in BMSCs. Meanwhile,
glucose uptake was unaffected byDnmt1ΔPrx1 (Supplementary Fig. 7D),
but glycolysis activity was enhanced (Supplementary Fig. 7E). LC/MS
was next carried out to measure changes in metabolites associated
with bioenergetic pathways. Levels of almost all major energy meta-
bolites involved in both the TCA cycle and glycolysis, including
coenzymes, were increased in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes compared to
Dnmt1ﬂox chondrocytes (Fig. 5C, S7F). Among them, levels of S-
adenosyl-methionine (SAM) and 2-ketoglutarate (2KG) were higher in
Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes than in controlDnmt1ﬂox chondrocytes. SAM is
a well-known substrate for DNA methylation, while 2KG is a substrate
for demethylation of methyl groups. The increased levels of SAM and
2KG observed in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes are considered to be due to
the following factors; The loss of Dnmt1 reduced the consumption of
SAM, which is required for DNA methylation, leading to an accumu-
lation of intracellular SAM. Additionally, the global reduction in DNA
methylation likely decreased the demand for DNA demethylation,
thereby reducing the consumption of 2KG, a key substrate for deme-
thylation, and resulting in increased intracellular 2KG levels. In parti-
cular, 2KG is important for the TCA cycle, and is a representative
energy metabolite that had increased levels in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chon-
drocytes. These ﬁndings suggest that the imbalance between the
demand and supply of methylation-related substrates may contribute
to the upregulation of intracellular energy metabolism.
Enhanced energy metabolism is required for cell differentiation
and mineralization21–24. Here, we examined whether enhanced miner-
a l i z a t i o ns e e ni nDnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes can be suppressed by
removing glucose, glutamine, and pyruvate from the culture medium.
As expected, essentially no calciﬁcation in Dnmt1ﬂox chondrocytes was
observed in the absence of glucose, glutamine, and pyruvate, but slight
calciﬁcation levels did persist in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes (Fig. 5D),
suggesting that aberrant energy metabolism pathways may be
engaged inDnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes. Furthermore, treatment with TCA
cycle inhibitors, such as glutaminase (CB839) or ATP synthesis (Oli-
gomycin) inhibitors, suppressed the abnormally enhanced energy
metabolism (Supplementary Fig. 7G) and mineralization (Fig.5E, S7H)
seen in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes to a similar extent as Dnmt1ﬂox.
To conﬁrm whether this suppression of energy metabolism also
inhibits calciﬁcation in vivo, Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice were treated with CB839
daily for 2 weeks beginning immediately after birth. In CB839-treated
Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice, µCT analysis of the region around the primary trabe-
cular bone of the proximal tibia showed a reduction in trabecular bone
volume compared to DMSO-treated Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice (Fig. 5F). Quanti-
tative analysis of the μCT imaging revealed that the bone mineral
density (BMD) of primary trabecular bone was signiﬁcantly decreased
Fig. 4 | Decreased DNA methylation associated with Dnmt1 deﬁciency enhances
expression of genes related to energy metabolism. A, B Volcano plot for RNA-
seq data (A)w i t h o u ta n d(B) with BMP2 differentiation stimulus. The plots were
generated automatically using RaNA-seq. The tables show the number of differ-
entially expressed genes. Red dots correspond to genes that had signiﬁcant dif-
ferential expression (Padj <0.05) betweenDnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes and Dnmt1ﬂox
chondrocytes.C Percentage of MBD2-mediated enrichment in methylated DNA in
1 µg total DNA from Dnmt1ﬂox (n =6 )a n dDnmt1ΔPrx1 (n = 6) chondrocytes. Data is
mean ± s.d. Signiﬁcance of mean differences was assessed using unpaired two-sided
t-tests.D Peak count frequency of MBD-Seq.E Venn diagram highlights the number
of genes with increased expression accompanying decreases in methylated DNA
due to Dnmt1 deﬁciency. F Enrichment analysis of genes (n = 123) having increased
expression that accompanied decreases in methylated DNA due to Dnmt1 deﬁ-
ciency, with P values calculated using Metascape.G Schematic diagram of genes
related to energy metabolism. H log2 fold-change of in vitro and in vivo RNA-seq
data for energy metabolism-related genes shown in (G). I Methylated DNA signals
for selected genes as illustrated with the Integrative Genome Viewer (IGV). Source
data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 7
Fig. 5 | Increased energy metabolism and promotion of mineralization in
Dnmt1-deﬁcient mice. A Glutamine uptake by Dnmt1ﬂox (n =3 )a n dDnmt1ΔPrx1
(n =3 )c h o n d r o c y t e s .B Left panel: Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) assessed after
addition of oligomycin, carbonyl cyanide 4- (triﬂuoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone
(FCCP), and antimycin A/rotenone (AA/ROT) at the indicated times. Right panel:
Basal respiration, ATP production and maximal respiration measured forDnmt1ﬂox
(n =3 )a n dDnmt1ΔPrx1 (n = 3) chondrocytes.C Relative quantiﬁcation of energy
metabolites by metabolome analysis ofDnmt1ﬂox (n =7 )a n dDnmt1ΔPrx1 (n =9 )
chondrocytes.D Calciﬁcation activity in primary cultured chondrocytes in the
presence or absence of glucose, glutamine, and pyruvate as evaluated by Alizarin
Red staining of Dnmt1ﬂox (n =5 )a n dDnmt1ΔPrx1 (n =5 )c h o n d r o c y t e s .E Calciﬁcation
activity in Dnmt1ﬂox and Dnmt1ΔPrx1 micromass cultured chondrocytes in the pre-
sence of energy metabolism inhibitors (CB839: Glutaminase inhibitor (n = 4), Oli-
gomycin: ATP synthesis inhibitor (n = 4)) as evaluated by Alizarin Red staining.
F µCT images of Dnmt1ΔPrx1 tibia treated with DMSO or CB839. The yellow dashed
line indicates the area around the primary trabecular bone analyzed by µCT.
Representative data from at least three individual mice are shown. Quantitative
analysis of (G) trabecular and (H) cortical bone parameters byμCT in DMSO (n =6 )
or CB839 (n = 6) treatment. All data are mean ± s.d. Signiﬁcance of mean differences
was assessed using unpaired t-tests or Tukey’s post hoc tests with two-tailed P
values. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 8
in the CB839-treatedDnmt1ΔPrx1 mice compared to the control, DMSO-
treated Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice. The number of trabecular bones was also
decreased and the spacing between them was increased in Dnmt1ΔPrx1
mice (Fig. 5G). On the other hand, no difference in cortical parameters
was observed between the two groups (Fig.5H). These results strongly
support a role for Dnmt1 activity at both a transcriptional and meta-
bolic level that regulates chondrocyte energy metabolism and in turn
cartilage calciﬁcation.
DNMT1 deﬁciency accelerates energy metabolism and differ-
entiation in human chondrocytes
Finally, to determine whether the mechanisms deﬁned in mice could
be applicable to humans, we performed similar analyses using human
chondrocytes. Human chondrocytes used in these studies were iso-
lated from knee articular cartilage that was removed and discarded
during surgical procedures. First, the gene expression levels were
suppressed by siRNA against DNMT1, with knockdown ef ﬁciency
conﬁrmed by RT-qPCR. DNMT1 gene expression levels decreased in
chondrocytes treated with three different types of siRNA against
DNMT1compared to chondrocytes treated with siControl (Supple-
mentary Fig. 8A). Meanwhile, gene expression levels of UHRF1,
DNMT3a and DNMT3b were signiﬁcantly increased in siDNMT1-treated
chondrocytes compared to siControl-treated chondrocytes, suggest-
ing that these genes may compensate for the decrease in DNMT1
(Supplementary Fig. 8A). Expression of marker genes for the early
stage of chondrocyte differentiation including SOX9, COL2A1 and
ACAN was downregulated whereas expression of marker genes for the
late stage of chondrocyte differentiation, such asRUNX2, COL10A1and
MMP13, was upregulated in siDNMT1 chondrocytes compared to
siControl chondrocytes (Fig. 6A). Genes related to osteoblastic dif-
ferentiation like COL1A1, ALPL and OCN were also upregulated in
siDNMT1-treated chondrocytes. In fact, a decrease in COL2A1 and an
increase in OCN were observed at the protein level in siDNMT1-treated
human chondrocytes as well as inDnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes (Fig.6B, C).
DNA methylation levels were also reduced in siDNMT1-treated human
chondrocytes compared to the siControl (Supplementary Fig. 8B).
Accordingly, gene expression levels of NOCT, SIRT5, SLC38A6 and
RAB3GAP1were upregulated in siDNMT1-treated human chondrocytes
as well as Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes (Fig.6A). Moreover, mitochondrial
activity in siDNMT1-treated chondrocytes was signiﬁcantly increased
compared to siControl chondrocytes (Fig. 6D). The cell proliferation
rate of human chondrocytes was also reduced by siDNMT1 treatment
(Supplementary Fig. 8C). These results demonstrated that DNMT1-
deﬁcient human chondrocytes exhibited similar characteristics to
those of Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes and strongly suggest that DNMT1
plays essential roles in both proliferation and differentiation of chon-
drocytes through the regulation of energy metabolism.
Discussion
In this study, Dnmt1 deﬁciency in limb mesenchymal cells resulted in
long bone shortening (Fig. 1 B–F, Supplementary Fig. 1A –E) with
decreased growth plate chondrocyte proliferation and enhancement
of ossiﬁcation (Fig. 2G, Supplementary Fig. 3A). Dnmt1 plays a crucial
role in the maintenance of DNA methylation, one of the most well-
known epigenetic modiﬁcations. DNA methylation induces structural
changes in chromatin and accumulation of methylation that, in turn,
contributes to the regulation of transcription 3. Establishment of
unique gene expression patterns during cell proliferation and differ-
entiation is attributed to DNA methylation, and inhibition of DNA
methylation leads to abnormal development25,26.
Here, RNA-Seq analysis of Dnmt1-de ﬁcient chondrocytes and
cartilage tissues revealed decreased cell proliferation and cartilage
matrix production, in addition to enhanced ossi ﬁcation (Fig. 3D–F,
Supplementary Fig. 6E). The cartilage matrix is reported to be dimin-
ished in chondrocytes treated with 5Aza, which inhibits DNA
methylation27. DNMT1 activation affects osteogenic differentiation
that negatively regulates mineralization10,11. In particular, expression
levels of Osx and Ocn, which are reported to be important for chon-
drocyte calci ﬁcation as well as osteoblasts 28–31,w e r es i g n iﬁcantly
increased in both cells and tissues from Dnmt1ΔPrx1 cartilage. Taken
together with the observed pheno types of postnatal arrest of long
bone growth in Dnmt1-deﬁcient mice, we conclude that Dnmt1 plays a
role to regulate longitudinal growth of long bones in part by control-
ling mineralization of postnatal growth plate chondrocytes.
However, based on the results of previous reports, how and when
Dnmt1 acts on bone length elongation was unclear. Prrx1-Cre-positive
cells can differentiate into various cell types, including chondrocytes
and osteoblast progenitors. Therefore, to conﬁrm the cell type-speciﬁc
phenotype, we used Col2a1-Cre and Osx-Cre mice for speciﬁc deletion
of Dnmt1 in chondrocytes and osteoblasts, respectively. Osx-Cre
Dnmt1-deﬁcient mice had no difference in long bone length com-
pared to control mice, but Col2-Cre Dnmt1-de ﬁcient mice had
decreased bone length (Supplementary Fig. 1G, H). These ﬁndings
suggested that maintenance of DNA methylation is required to main-
tain Col2a1-positive early-stage chondrocyte characteristics and that
demethylation of DNA may be required for calci ﬁcation. In addition,
Dnmt1 expression decreases and, conversely, expression ofTet genes
increases with chondrocyte differentiation (Fig. 2A, Supplementary
Fig. 4A). These results could indicate that a regulatory mechanism for
proper gene expression mediated by appropriate DNA methylation,
such as that seen in DNA methylation maintenance in proliferating
chondrocytes and demethylati on of DNA in hypertrophic chon-
drocytes, is essential for bone elongation and development.
In addition to shortened bone length,Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice exhibited a
phenotype of growth plate loss as they grew (Fig. 2H, I). Increased
expression of Rankl and accelerated osteoclastogenesis with chon-
drocyte differentiation together with a lack of Dnmt1 did not affect
osteoblasts (Supplementary Fig. 3B–D), which is consistent with pre-
vious reports showing that chondrocytes regulate osteoclastogenesis
by secreting Rankl and Opg 32–34.T h e s eﬁndings suggested that the
phenotype of trabecular bone and growth plate loss is entirely due to
chondrocyte abnormalities in growth plates. Taken together, short-
ening of bone length in Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice is caused by suppression of
chondrocyte proliferation and accelerated differentiation/calciﬁcation
in the growth plate, and that the abnormally differentiated cartilage
promotes osteoclastogenesis that results in loss of trabecular bone
and growth plates.
Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice also exhibited greater shortening of bone length
compared to mice with limb mesenchymal cell-speci ﬁc Uhrf1
knockout5. This difference could indicate that mechanisms for main-
tenance of DNA methylation involving Dnmt1 have a larger role in limb
development than the multi-functional Uhrf1. However, the mechan-
ism by which Dnmt1 regulates mineralization in chondrocytes
remained unclear. To elucidate the detailed molecular mechanism of
Dnmt1 in chondrocyte mineralization here we carried out an inte-
grated RNA-Seq and MBD-Seq analysis. Genome-wide integrated ana-
lysis indicated that Dnmt1 regulated not only expression of genes
involved in ossi ﬁcation, but also that of genes related to energy
metabolism (Fig. 4F–I). Indeed, calciﬁcation was enhanced (Fig. 3B).
Levels of nearly all major energy metabolites, including ATP, that are
required for mineralization, in addition to expression of SAM and 2KG,
associated with DNA methylation, were also increased in Dnmt1ΔPrx1
chondrocytes (Fig.5C). These results were similar to those for Dnmt1-
deﬁcient human articular chondrocytes in which expression of genes
related to energy metabolism and ATP production was upregulated
(Fig. 6D). ATP is essential for cell survival, proliferation, and differ-
entiation. In chondrocytes in particular, ATP is a substrate for pyr-
ophosphate (PPi) feeding and inorganic phosphate (Pi) synthesis to
produce hydroxyapatite35. Previously, transgenic mice overexpressing
Ankylosis (Ank), a key regulator of physiological mineralization that
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 9
regulates the Pi/PPi balance, had shortened spines and enhanced
mineralization36. A primary molecular mechanism for ATP production
is the TCA cycle, which involves both 2KG and SAM. During the TCA
cycle, SAM is converted to SAH, which eventually leads to the
formation of succinyl CoA and pyruvate that further feed back into the
cycle37. 2KG also functions as a substrate for DNA demethylation
mediated by TET family proteins, which promote DNA demethylation
by converting 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
Fig. 6 | Accelerated ATP production and differentiation in human chon-
drocytes with DNMT1 deﬁciency. A RT-qPCR to determine expression levels of
genes related to energy metabolism and chondrocyte differentiation in human-
derived chondrocytes after BMP2 differentiation stimulus (each siRNA-treated cells
n =3 ) .B Immunocytochemical staining for nuclear DNA (DAPI, Blue), COL2A1
(Magenta) and OCN (Green) in micromass cultures of human-derived chondrocytes
after BMP2 differentiation stimulus. Representative data from at least three
individual mice are shown. C Quantitative analysis of COL2A1 and OCN positive
staining area in immunocytochemical staining (each siRNA-treated cellsn =3 ) .
D ATP production calculated from OCR (each siRNA-treated cellsn =3 ) .A l ld a t aa r e
mean ± s.d. Signiﬁcance of mean differences was assessed using unpaired t-tests or
Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test with two-tailedP values. Source data are
provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 10
(5hmC)4.I n Dnmt1ΔPrx1 chondrocytes, DNA methylation is reduced
genome-wide and concurrently, the demand for DNA demethylation is
reduced, leading to accumulation of 2KG. This accumulation of 2KG
decreases collagen synthesis via upregulation of collagen prolyl
hydroxylases and enhances ossi ﬁcation that leads to shortening of
long bones24. Previous reports indicated that proper amounts of TCA
cycle intermediates are vital for the development and homeostasis of
cartilage and bone22.
Meanwhile, mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), a nuclear
DNA-encoded protein, is needed to maintain mtDNA. Disruption of
Tfam in chondrocytes causes severe ATP depletion via decreased
mtDNA that results in suppressed chondrocyte mineralization with
long bone shortening 38. Mice de ﬁcient in both Tfam/Hif1a had
improved chondrocyte mineralization and bone length through
upregulated production of metabolites involved in the TCA cycle 13.
Abnormal glutamine metabolism associated with the Hif1a-induced
2KG stabilization pathway promotes mineralization, accompanied by
increased apoptosis that impairs bone growth 23,39,40.H o w e v e r ,t h e
mechanisms associated with the regulation and control of energy
metabolism and energy supply in cartilage, an avascular tissue, during
chondrocyte differentiation were not clear. In this study, we dis-
covered a comprehensive intracellular energy metabolism regulation
mechanism, in which Dnmt1-mediated DNA methylation controls
energy metabolism by regulating expression of genes related to
energy metabolism and restricting intracellular consumption of SAM
and 2KG associated with DNA demethylation.
This study has some limitations. This study did not identify de
novo methylation of DNA in chondrocytes, the relationship between
maintenance methylation and demethylation, or the role of Dnmt1 in
articular cartilage. Increased expression of Dnmt1 has been associated
with the progression of OA 9,41, while abnormalities related to energy
metabolism are involved in OA onset42. Questions concerning the role
of Dnmt1 activity in human and mouse chondrocytes remain to be
addressed, such as how Dnmt1 expression is regulated during differ-
entiation and whether Dnmt1-mediated changes in energy metabolism
are relevant to other age-related pathologies, including OA. Thus, the
relationship between DNA methylation and cartilage diseases requires
clariﬁcation.
In conclusion, our ﬁndings revealed that Dnmt1-mediated main-
tenance of appropriate DNA methylation during differentiation gov-
erns bone elongation and development by altering energy metabolism
through the regulation of expression of genes related to chondrocyte
differentiation, as well as of genes related to the supply of metabolites
that in turn control chondrocyte differentiation/mineralization (Sup-
plementary Fig. 9).
Methods
Ethical regulations
This study was approved as described below and involved the use of
both animal and human samples. All animals were maintained and
used according to the experimental protocol approved by the Animal
Experiment Committee in Ehime University, Japan. Experiments
involving human samples were approved by the IRB of Ehime Uni-
versity. All patients provided informed written consent to participate
in the study. No ﬁnancial or other compensation was provided to
participants. Due to ethical restrictions, the human samples used in
this study are not available for sharing.
Animals
Dnmt1 ﬂox mice were kindly provided by Prof. Rudolf Jaenisch.Dnmt1
ﬂox mice were crossed with Prrx1-Cre mice [B6.Cg-Tg(Prrx1-cre)1Cjt/J,
Jackson Laboratory] to generate Prrx1-Cre; Dnmt1ﬂox/ﬂox (Dnmt1Δprx1)
mice. Littermate Dnmt1 ﬂox (Dnmt1ﬂox) mice were used as a control.
Additionally, to con ﬁrm whether the phenotype is derived from
chondrocytes, we generated chondrocyte- and osteoblast-speci ﬁc
Dnmt1-deﬁcient mice using Col2a1-Cre (MGI ID: MGI 2671895) kindly
provided by Prof. Gérard Karsenty43,a n dSp7 (Osx)-Cre-EGFP (MGI ID:
MGI 3689350) mice obtained from Jackson Laboratory. Both male and
female mice were used to identify molecules regulated by Dnmt1 that
are not sex dependent. All mice were housed in a speci ﬁc pathogen-
free facility under climate-controlled conditions with a 12-h light/dark
cycle and were provided with water and standard diet (MF, Oriental
Yeast, Japan)ad libitum. To inhibit energy metabolism,Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice
were treated intraperitoneally daily with CB839 (10µg/g, glutaminase
inhibitor, Selleckchem, Cat. #S7655) for 2 weeks beginning immedi-
ately after birth.
Skeletal preparation
Neonates were skinned, eviscerated, and ﬁxed in 100% ethanol for
24 hours before transfer to 100% acetone for 24 hours. Skeletal sam-
ples were stained with 0.015% Alcian Blue followed by 0.005% Alizarin
Red and 0.05% glacial acid dissolved in 70% ethanol for 4 –7 days
before sequential clearance in 1% KOH with glycerol. Cartilage and
mineralized bone were stained blue and red, respectively.
Bone length calculation and images
Long bones were harvested andﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA)
overnight at 4 °C and soaked in 70% ethanol. Bone length was calcu-
lated using ImageJ from images taken with a soft X-ray device
(Sofron)44,45 or an Electronic Caliper. A Scanco Medical μCT35 system
(SCANCO Medical) was used for microcomputed tomography (µCT).
Histological analysis
Mice were euthanized and the tibiae and femurs were harvested. The
collected tissue was ﬁxed with 4% PFA overnight at 4 °C, followed by
decalciﬁcation with EDTA. For in vivo BrdU uptake assays, 100 mg/kg
BrdU (Abcam: ab142567) was injected intraperitoneally 24 hours
before sampling. Long bone samples were embedded in parafﬁna f t e r
dehydration, and 5-7 μm-thick paraf ﬁn sections were cut with a
microtome (RM2255, Leica Biosystems). Sections were stained with
von Kossa, Safranin O/Fast green, and also used for immunohis-
tochemistry (IHC). For IHC, deparafﬁnized sections were incubated in
2.5% hyaluronidase (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat. #H3506) solution for 30 min
at room temperature before boiling for 45 min at 90 °C in 0.05%
citraconic acid solution (ImmunoSaver; Wako, Cat. #097-06192) to
retrieve antigens. After blocking for 60 minutes at room temperature
in PBS containing 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 0.02 % Triton,
the sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies
against Dnmt1 (1:50, CST, Cat. #D63A6), Uhrf1 (1:50, Santa Cruz, Cat.
#sc-373750), BrdU (1:250, abcam, Cat. #ab6326), Sp7 (1:1000, abcam,
Cat. #ab209484), Ctsk (1:50, Santa Cruz, Cat. #sc-48353), Opg (1:100,
Bioss, Cat. #bs-0431R) or Rankl (1:100, Santa Cruz, Cat. #sc-377079).
The sections were washed again with PBS, and signals were visualized
after incubating with secondary antibodies for 60 min at room tem-
perature followed by the addition of TrueVIEW (Vector Laboratories,
Cat. #SP-8400) to suppress autoﬂuorescence. The area of proliferative
and hypertrophic cartilage was measured using ImageJ according to
the cell morphology in regions of interest (ROI) in the tibia.
Isolation of mouse chondrocytes
For isolation of primary chondrocytes, knee cartilage was harvested
from postnatal day 3-5 mice and treated with 3 mg/mL collagenase D
(Roche, Cat. #11088866001) in DMEM (Gibco, Cat. #10569010) sup-
plemented with 1% antibiotic-antimycotic solution (Gibco, Cat.
#15240062) for 90 minutes. The connective tissue was then thor-
oughly removed by washing, and the tissue was incubated overnight
with fresh medium containing collagenase. Cells were cultured in
DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Nichirei
Biosciences, Cat. #173012) and 1% antibiotic/antimycotic solution
(Gibco, Cat. #15240062) at 37 °C and 5% CO2.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 11
Isolation of mouse bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs)
For isolation of BMSCs, bone marrow was collected from long bones
and suspended in MEM- α supplemented with 10% FBS and 1%
antibiotic-antimycotic solution. Bone marrow cells wereﬁltered with a
70 µm cell strainer (Corning, Cat. #352350) and cultured at 37 °C for
48 hours in an incubator with 5% CO 2. At the end of the incubation,
non-adherent cells were removed, and the culture dishes were care-
fully washed with PBS to avoid detaching adherent cells, which were
used as BMSCs.
Isolation of human chondrocytes
Human articular specimens were obtained from patients with OA who
underwent knee joint replacement surgery at the Ehime University
Hospital. Both male and female samples were used to identify mole-
cules regulated by Dnmt1 that are not sex-dependent. To obtain
chondrocytes, articular cartilage tissues were minced and treated with
0.1% trypsin solution and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C with shaking.
The connective tissue was then thoroughly removed by washing, fol-
lowed by treatment with fresh medium containing 3 mg/mL col-
lagenase D for 2 –3 hour at 37 °C with shaking. The supernatant was
discarded carefully, and fresh medium containing 3 mg/mL col-
lagenase D was added before incubation for overnight at 37 °C. Iso-
lated cells were ﬁltered with a 40 μm cell strainer (Corning, Cat.
#352340) and seeded in culture dishes at 37 °C in a humidi ﬁed atmo-
sphere of 5% CO2.
Monolayer culture
To induce differentiation, cells were seeded at con ﬂuence, cultured
with 100 ng/mL BMP2 (Osteopharma, Cat. #CK-B2 or BioLegend, Cat.
#767306), 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid, and 10 mM β-glycerophosphate,
and stained with Alcian Blue and Alizarin Red. To inhibit energy
metabolism, cells were incubated with 10 μM CB839 (glutaminase
inhibitor, Selleckchem, Cat. # S7655) and 1 μM oligomycin (ATP
synthesis inhibitor, Adipogen, Cat. # AG-CN2-0517).
Micromass cultures
Micromass cultures were also used to analyze matrix deposition and
calciﬁcation. To assess chondrogenic differentiation, cells were
resuspended in medium at a concentration of 1.5 × 105 cells/10µLa n d
seeded as micromasses. Cells were allowed to attach for 2 hours at
37 °C, after which 500 µL of differentiation medium supplemented
with 100 ng/mL BMP2, 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid, and 10 mM
β-glycerophosphate was added to the wells. Differentiated cells were
stained with Alcian Blue, Toluidine Blue, and Alizarin Red. To inhibit
energy metabolism, cells were incubated with 10μMC B 8 3 9a n d1μM
oligomycin.
siRNA experiments using mouse and human chondrocytes
siRNA targeting mouse Dnmt1, human DNMT1, and scrambled
siRNA as a negative control were purchased from Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc (siRNA IDs: s65071 [siDnmt1 #1], s65073 [siDnmt1 #2],
s4215 [siDNMT1 #1], s4216 [siDNMT1 #2], s4217 [siDNMT1 #3]).
siRNAs were transfected into mouse or human chondrocytes using
Lipofectamine™ RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc, Cat. #13778150). After treatment with siRNA for 1 week,
cells were analyzed in cell counting, cellular metabolism, and
immunocytochemistry assays, as well as for measurement of
chondrocyte differentiation marker gene expression. In addition to
the siRNA period described above, total RNA was extracted after an
additional 3 weeks of treatment with siRNA in the presence of
100 ng/mL BMP2, 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid, and 10 mM β-
glycerophosphate. For the cell counting assay, the same number
of chondrocytes were seeded before siRNA treatment, and the cell
number was determined 1 week after siRNA treatment for the cal-
culation of the proliferation rate.
Immunocytochemistry
Primary cultured chondrocytes were seeded onto chamber slides (Lab-
Tek, Cat. #177445PK) at a density of 1 × 10 4 cells per well. For BrdU
incorporation assays, the medium was replaced with medium con-
taining 10 μM BrdU. The cells were ﬁxed with 4% PFA for 5 minutes at
room temperature and then permeabilized with 0.5% Triton in PBS for
10 minutes. Non-speciﬁc binding was blocked by incubating cells with
1% BSA and 0.02% Triton in PBS for 1 hour at room temperature. Cells
were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies against
target proteins (Dnmt1 (1:300), BrdU (1:250), Col2a1 (1:200, Santa Cruz,
Cat. #sc-7764,) or Osteocalcin (1:200, Proteintech, Cat. #16157-1-AP))
that were diluted in blocking buffer. After washing with PBS, cells were
incubated with ﬂuorophore-conjugated secondary antibodies for
1 hour at room temperature in the dark. To detect apoptotic cells,
TUNEL staining was performed (Roche, Cat. #11684817910). After
permeabilization, cells were reacted with ﬂuorescein-conjugated
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase for 60 minutes at 37 °C
according to the manufacturer ’s instructions. Nuclei were counter-
stained with 4 ’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for 5 minutes.
Finally, coverslips were mounted onto glass slides using mounting
medium and sealed with nail polish. Immunoﬂuorescence images were
acquired using a ﬂuorescence microscope.
Real-time RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted using Isogene (Nippon Gene, Cat. #319-90211)
and an RNeasy spin column kit (QIAGEN, Cat. #74106), and then
treated with DNase I (QIAGEN, Cat. #79254). cDNA was synthesized
from the total RNA using PrimeScript RT Master Mix (Takara Bio, Cat.
#RR036), and real-time RT-PCR was performed using TB-Green Premix
Ex Taq II (Takara Bio, Cat. #RR820) with Thermal Cycler Dice (Takara
Bio) according to the manufacturer ’s instructions. Gene expression
levels were normalized using the housekeeping gene Gapdh. Primers
were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc, and sequences are
listed in Supplementary Data 1.
RNA-Seq analysis
Primary cultured chondrocytes that were and were not treated with
BMP2 for 3 days were used for RNA-Seq. Total RNA was extracted using
RNeasy spin column kit and the quality veriﬁed using an Agilent 2100
Bioanalyzer. RNA-Seq analysis was carried out as described below, in
accordance with methods reported in previous studies 5,46.R N A - s e q
libraries were prepared using an NEBNext Ultra II Directional RNA
Library Prep Kit (New England Biolabs, Cat. #E7760) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions and subsequently validated for an average
size of about 370 bp using a 2100 Bioanalyzer and an Agilent DNA1000
kit. Sequencing of paired-end reads (150 bp) was performed with a
NovaSeq 6000 S4 Reagent Kit on a NovaSeq 6000 (Illumina).
Cartilage tissues were obtained from mice on postnatal day 5, and
total RNA was extracted using an RNeasy spin column kit. The RNA
integrity value was veriﬁed using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer. RNA-
seq was performed with an Illumina NextSeq 500 instrument, with a
read con ﬁguration of 75 bp for single reads; 3 million reads were
generated per sample.
Sequence data were analyzed by RaNA-Seq 47. The RNA-Seq data
set was deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under
accession number GSE270640.
Enrichment of methylated DNA
Methylated DNA was enriched by MBD2-mediated precipitation and
subjected to next-generation sequencing as follows. Extracted DNA
from chondrocytes was sonicated with a Covaris sonicator (M&S
Instruments) to obtain approximately 300 bp fragments. MBD2-
mediated enrichment of methylated DNA was performed using an
EpiXplore Methylated DNA Enrichment Kit (Takara Bio, Cat. #631963)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The amount of enriched
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 12
methylated DNA from 1 μg total DNA was measured using a Quantus
Fluorometer (Promega).
MBD-Seq analysis
MBD-Seq was performed on enriched methylated DNA following
established protocols, as described below, to analyze methylated DNA
regions genome-wide5,46. Libraries for MBD-Seq analysis were prepared
using a NEBNext Ultra II DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (New Eng-
land Biolabs, Cat. #E7645) according to the manufacturer ’si n s t r u c -
tions and validated for an average size of about 550 –600 bp using a
High Sensitivity DNA Assay kit. Sequencing of paired-end reads
(150 bp) was performed using a NovaSeq 6000 S4 Reagent Kit (Illu-
mina, Cat. #20028312) with a NovaSeq 6000 (Illumina) and mapped on
the mouse genome (mm10) using Galaxy48. The MBD-Seq data set was
deposited in the GEO under accession number GSE270641.
Analysis of sequencing data
Using RNA-Seq results, differentially expressed genes that exhibited
more than two-fold increased or decreased expression levels in
Dnmt1ΔPrx1 mice relative to Dnmt1ﬂox mice were extracted. Gene Ontol-
ogy analyses were performed on the extracted genes using
MetaScape49. For MBD-Seq, peak calling was performed by MACS2,
and integrative analyses were carried out using Galaxy48.
Glucose and glutamine uptake assay
Primary cultured chondrocytes were seeded at 2 × 104 cells/well in 96-
well plates the day before measurement. Glucose and glutamine con-
centrations in the medium were measured using a Glucose Assay Kit-
WST (DOJINDO, Cat. #G264) and Glutamine Assay Kit-WST (DOJINDO,
Cat. #G268), respectively, and uptake was calculated according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Absorbance at 450 nm was measured
using a Multiskan SkyHigh Microplate Spectrophotometer (Thermo
Fisher).
Cellular metabolism assay
Metabolic ﬂux was measured using a Seahorse XFp Flux Analyzer
(Seahorse Bioscience). Primary cultured chondrocytes BMSCs were
seeded at a density of 3 × 10 4 cells per well into an 8-well Seahorse
culture plate (Seahorse Bioscience, Cat. #103022-100) one day before
the start of the assay. Energy metabolism inhibitors were added at the
same time as the cells were seeded. For OCR analysis, cells were cul-
tured for 1 hour in DMEM (Seahorse Bioscience, Cat. #103575-100)
supplemented with 10 mM glucose (Seahorse Bioscience, Cat#103577-
100), 1 mM pyruvate (Seahorse Bioscience, Cat. #103578-100) and
2 mM glutamine (Seahorse Bioscience, Cat. #103579-100) and equili-
brated at 37 °C in a CO 2-free atmosphere. Following three basal mea-
surements, 2 μMo l i g o m y c i n ,0 . 2 5μM carbonyl cyanide 4-
(triﬂuoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone (FCCP), and 0.5μMa n t i m y c i nA /
rotenone (Seahorse Bioscience, Cat. #103010-100) were sequentially
injected into the plate. For analysis of the ECAR, cells were cultured for
1 hour in DMEM supplemented with 2 mM glutamine and equilibrated
at 37 °C in a CO 2-free atmosphere. After two basal measurements,
10 mM glucose and 2 μM oligomycin were sequentially injected. The
analysis data was calculated using Wave Desktop software (Seahorse
Bioscience).
Metabolome analysis by mass spectrometry
For metabolome analysis, primary cultured chondrocytes obtained
from Dnmt1ﬂox mice (n =7 )a n dDnmt1ΔPrx1 mice (n = 9) were seeded in
culture dishes without BMP2 treatment. Samples for mass spectro-
metry were prepared as described below, following previously pub-
lished protocols50. The cells were washed with cold PBS, quenched
with cold methanol, and collected by scraping. Internal standards (10-
camphorsulfonic acid, 1500 pmol; piperazine-1,4-bis (2-ethanesulfonic
acid), 1500 pmol; methionine sulfone, 300 pmol; lidocaine, 300 pmol;
2-bromohypoxanthine, 300 pmol) were added to quenched MeOH
samples. Samples were vortexed for 1 min and sonicated for 5 min at
room temperature. Samples were centrifuged at 16,000 ×g at 4 °C for
5m i n ,a n d4 0 0μL of the supernatant was transferred in clean tubes. To
this, CHCl₃ and H₂O were added (MeOH:CHCl₃:H₂O = 5:5:4), followed
by centrifugation. The upper aqueous layer (500μL) was collected and
dried using a centrifugal evaporator. Samples were reconstituted in
50 µL water prior to hydrophilic metabolome analysis (i.e. anionic
polar metabolites, cationic polar metabolites, acyl-CoAs, and acyl-
carnitines).
Anionic polar metabolites were analyzed via ion chromatography
(Dionex ICS-5000 + HPIC system, Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc) with a
Dionex IonPac AG11-HC-4μm guard column (2 mm i.d × 50 mm, 4 μm
particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) and a Dionex IonPac AS11-HC-4
μmc o l u m n( 2 m mi . d×2 5 0 m m ,4μm particle size, Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc) coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher
Scientiﬁc) (IC/MS). The ﬂow rate was 0.3 mL/min and the injection
volume was 5 µL. Column oven temperature was set at 30 °C. To assist
the desolvation for better electrospray, a make-up pump delivering
1 mM ammonium acetate in methanol at 0.1 mL/min was used. Elution
was performed using a potassium hydroxide (KOH) gradient. The
gradient conditions are follows: started with an initial 10 mM KOH,
increased to 100 mM at 24 min, held 100 mM for 3 min, followed by a
decrease to 10 mM within 0.1 min, and held for 7.9 min to re-
equilibrate the column. The Q Exactive MS was operated in positive
and negative electrospray ionization modes with the following para-
meters: sheath gas ﬂow rate 50arb, auxiliary gas ﬂow rate 10arb,
electrospray voltage of 4.0 kV in the positive ion mode and−3.0 kV in
the negative ion mode, capillary temperature 250 °C, S-lens RF level
60, heater temperature 400 °C. Full MS scans were acquired at a
resolution of 70,000, AGC target of 3 × 106, maximum injection time of
200 ms, and scan range of m/z 70-1050.
Cationic polar metabolites were analyzed via liquid chromato-
graphy (LC) ((Nexera X2 UHPLC system, Shimadzu) with a Discovery
HS F5 column (2.1 mm i.d × 150 mm, 3μm particle size, Sigma-Aldrich)
coupled to a Q Exactive instrument (PFPP-LC/MS). The ﬂow rate was
0.25 mL/min and the injection volume was 2 µL. Column oven tem-
perature was set at 40 °C. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water, and
solvent B was acetonitrile. The gradient conditions are follows: started
with an initial 0% B held for 5 min, increased to 40% B at 15 min,
increased to 100% B within 0.1 min, held 100% B for 2.9 min, followed
by a decrease to 0% B within 0.1 min, and held for 6.9 min to re-
equilibrate the column. The Q Exactive MS was operated in positive
and negative electrospray ionization modes with the following para-
meters: sheath gas ﬂow rate, 50arb; auxiliary gas ﬂow rate, 10arb;
electrospray voltage of 4.0 kV in the positive ion mode and−3.0 kV in
the negative ion mode; capillary temperature, 250 °C; S-lens RF level,
60; heater temperature, 400 °C. Full MS scans were acquired at a
resolution of 70,000, AGC target of 1 × 106, maximum injection time of
200 ms in the positive ion mode and 100 msec in the negative ion
mode, and scan range of m/z 70-1050.
Acyl-CoAs and acyl-carnitines were analyzed using LC (Nexera X2
UHPLC system) with an Inert Sustain C18 column (2.1 mm i.d × 150 mm,
3 μm particle size, GL Sciences) coupled to a Q Exactive instrument
(C18-LC/MS). The ﬂow rate was 0.3 mL/min and the injection volume
was 2 µL. Column oven temperature was set at 40 °C. Solvent A was
5 mM ammonium acetate in water, and solvent B was acetonitrile. The
gradient conditions are follows: started with an initial 0% B, increased
to 95% B at 13 min, held 95% B for 7.0 min, followed by a decrease to 2%
B within 0.1 min, and held for 4.9 min to re-equilibrate the column. MS
parameters for acyl-CoAs are follows: sheath gas ﬂow rate, 50arb;
auxiliary gas ﬂow rate10arb; spray voltage, 4.0 kV; capillary tempera-
ture, 250 °C; S-lens RF level, 60; heater temperature, 400 °C. Full MS
scans in positive ion mode were acquired at a resolution of 70,000,
AGC target of 3 × 10 6, maximum injection time of 400 ms, and scan
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 13
range of m/z 700–1200. MS parameters for acyl-carnitines are follows:
sheath gasﬂow rate, 50arb; auxiliary gasﬂow rate 10arb; spray voltage,
3.0 kV; capillary temperature, 250 °C; S-lens level, 60; heater tem-
perature, 400 °C. Full MS scans in positive ion mode were acquired at a
resolution of 70,000, AGC target of 1 × 106, maximum injection time of
100 ms, and scan range of m/z 100-1500.
Data analysis was performed using Reyﬁcs Cascade software (ver.
1.1.2). Identi ﬁcation of hydrophilic metabolites acquired using the
three analytical platforms was accomplished by comparing retention
time, MS and MS/MS spectra of the samples with those of authentic
standards under identical conditions using an in-house library.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 10. Two-
tailed unpaired Student’s t-tests were used to compare two groups,
and one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s or Dunnett’s multiple com-
parisons test was applied as appropriate. For all graphs, data are
represented as the mean ± SD. Statistical signi ﬁcance was accepted
when P values were less than 0.05. The sample sizes were determined
empirically based on our previous experience and review of similar
experiments in the literature. The number of animals utilized is
detailed in the correspondingﬁgure legends.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The raw data that support the experimental ﬁndings are included as
Source Data provided with this paper. Raw RNA-Seq and MBD-Seq data
have been deposited in GEO under accession numbersGSE270640and
GSE270641, respectively. Apart from the data included in the Source
Data ﬁle, the metabolomic data cannot be made publicly available at
this time because they are relate d to other ongoing experiments.
Researchers requiring further access may contact us with a detailed
description of the intended use. Source data are provided with
this paper.
References
1 . K r o n e n b e r g ,H .M .D e v e l o p m e n t a lr e g u l a t i o no ft h eg r o w t hp l a t e .
Nature 423, 332– 336 (2003).
2. Bernstein, B. E., Meissner, A. & Lander, E. S. The mammalian epi-
genome. Cell 128, 669– 681 (2007).
3. Almouzni G., Cedar H. Maintenance of epigenetic information. Cold
Spring. Harb. Perspect. Biol. 8, https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.
a019372 (2016).
4. Greenberg, M. V. C. & Bourc ’his, D. The diverse roles of DNA
methylation in mammalian development and disease.Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol. 20,5 9 0– 607 (2019).
5. Yamashita M. et al. Uhrf1 is indispensable for normal limb growth by
regulating chondrocyte differentiation through speciﬁcg e n e
expression.Development145, https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.157412
(2018).
6 . M a n c i n i ,M . ,M a g n a n i ,E . ,M a c c h i ,F .&B o n a p a c e ,I .M .T h em u l t i -
functionality of UHRF1: epigenome maintenance and preservation
of genome integrity. Nucleic Acids Res. 49,6 0 5 3– 6068 (2021).
7. Yamaguchi, K. et al. Non-canonical functions of UHRF1 maintain
DNA methylation homeostasis in cancer cells.Nat. Commun. 15,
2960 (2024).
8. Zhang, Y. et al. Triclocarban triggers osteoarthritis via DNMT1-
mediated epigenetic modiﬁcation and suppression of COL2A in
cartilage tissues.J. Hazard. Mater. 447, 130747 (2023).
9. Iijima, H. et al. Age-related matrix stiffening epigenetically regulates
alpha-Klotho expression and compromises chondrocyte integrity.
Nat. Commun. 14, 18 (2023).
10. Tao C. et al. DNMT1 is a negative regulator of osteogenesis. Biol.
Open 11, https://doi.org/10.1242/bio.058534(2022).
11. Assis, R. I. F. et al. DNMT1 inhibitor restores RUNX2 Expression and
mineralization in periodontal ligament cells.DNA Cell Biol. 40,
662– 674 (2021).
12. Warren, A. et al. The NAD salvag e pathway in mesenchymal cells is
indispensable for skeletal development in mice.Nat. Commun. 14,
3616 (2023).
13. Yao, Q. et al. Suppressing mitochondrial respiration is critical for
Hypoxia tolerance in the fetal growth plate.Dev. Cell 49,7 4 8– 763.
e747 (2019).
14. Provot, S. & Schipani, E. Mole cular mechanisms of endochondral
bone development.Biochem. Biophys. Res Commun.328,6 5 8– 665
(2005).
15. Gandasi N. R. et al. Glutamine Uptake via SNAT6 and Caveolin
regulates glutamine-glutamate cycle.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijms22031167(2021).
16. Zhu S. et al. Sirt5 de ﬁciency causes post-translational protein
malonylation and dysregulated cellular metabolism in chon-
drocytes under obesity conditions.Cartilage, https://doi.org/10.
1101/2020.11.30.404103(2020).
17. Onder, Y. et al. The Circadian Protein Nocturnin regulates metabolic
adaptation in brown Adipose tissue.iScience 19,8 3– 92 (2019).
18. Estrella, M. A. et al. The metabolites NADP(+) and NADPH are the
targets of the circadian protein Nocturnin (Curled).Nat. Commun.
10,2 3 6 7( 2 0 1 9 ) .
19. Kumar, S. & Lombard, D. B. Functions of the sirtuin deacylase SIRT5
in normal physiology and pathobiology.Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol.
Biol. 53,3 1 1– 334 (2018).
20. Fukui, K. et al. Isolation and characterization of a GTPase activating
protein speciﬁc for the Rab3 subfamily of small G proteins. J. Biol.
Chem. 272, 4655– 4658 (1997).
2 1 . D e v i g n e s ,C .S . ,C a r m e l i e t ,G .&S t e g e n ,S .A m i n oa c i dm e t a b o l i s m
in skeletal cells. Bone Rep. 17, 101620 (2022).
22. Suzuki A., Minamide M., Iwaya C., Ogata K., Iwata J. Role of meta-
bolism in bone development and homeostasis.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21,
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21238992(2020).
23. Stegen, S. et al. Glutamine metabolism controls chondrocyte
identity and function.Dev. Cell 53,5 3 0– 544.e538 (2020).
24. Stegen, S. et al. HIF-1alpha m etabolically controls collagen
synthesis and modiﬁcation in chondrocytes.Nature 565,
511– 515 (2019).
25. Lui, J. C. Growth disorders caused by variants in epigenetic reg-
ulators: progress and prospects.Front Endocrinol.15,1 3 2 7 3 7 8
(2024).
26. Walewska, A., Janucik, A., Tynecka, M., Moniuszko, M. & Eljaszewicz,
A. Mesenchymal stem cells under epigenetic control - the role of
epigenetic machinery in fate decision and functional properties.
Cell Death Dis. 14,7 2 0( 2 0 2 3 ) .
27. Perez-Maldonado, M. A., Gonzalez-Gonzalez, X. A., Chimal-Monroy,
J .&M a r i n - L l e r a ,J .C .I nﬂuence of DNA-methylation at multiple
stages of limb chondrogenesis.Dev. Biol. 512,1 – 10 (2024).
28. Yu X. F. et al. Novel function of Osteocalcin in Chondrocyte dif-
ferentiation and endochondral ossiﬁcation revealed on a CRISPR/
Cas9 bglap-bglap2 deﬁciency mouse model. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 25,
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25189945(2024).
29. Nishimura, R. et al. Osterix regulates calci ﬁcation and degradation
of chondrogenic matrices through matrix metalloproteinase 13
(MMP13) expression in association with transcription factor Runx2
during endochondral ossiﬁcation. J. Biol. Chem. 287,3 3 1 7 9– 33190
(2012).
30. Xing, W., Godwin, C., Pourteymoor, S. & Mohan, S. Conditional
disruption of the osterix gene in chondrocytes during early post-
natal growth impairs secondary ossiﬁcation in the mouse tibial
epiphysis.Bone Res. 7,2 4( 2 0 1 9 ) .
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 14
31. Oh, J. H., Park, S. Y., de Crombrugghe, B. & Kim, J. E. Chondrocyte-
speciﬁc ablation of Osterix leads to impaired endochondral ossiﬁ-
cation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.418,6 3 4– 640 (2012).
3 2 . R a s h i d ,H . ,S m i t h ,C .M . ,C o n v e r s ,V . ,C l a r k ,K .&J a v e d ,A .R u n x 2
deletion in hypertrophic chondrocytes impairs osteoclast mediated
bone resorption.Bone 181, 117014 (2024).
33. Wang, B., Jin, H., Shu, B., Mira, R. R. & Chen, D. Chondrocytes-
speciﬁc expression of Osteoprotegerin modulates osteoclast for-
mation in metaphyseal bone.Sci. Rep. 5, 13667 (2015).
34. Usui, M. et al. Murine and chic ken chondrocytes regulate osteo-
clastogenesis by producing RANKL in response to BMP2.J. Bone
Min. Res. 23,3 1 4– 325 (2008).
35. Ryan, L. M., Kurup, I. V., Derfus, B. A. & Kushnaryov, V. M. ATP-
induced chondrocalcinosis.Arthritis Rheum.35,1 5 2 0– 1525 (1992).
36. Ohnishi, T. et al. Loss of function mutation in Ank causes aberrant
mineralization and acquisition of osteoblast-like-phenotype by the
cells of the intervertebral disc.Cell Death Dis. 14, 447 (2023).
37. Amanda, F. C. L. Mitochondrial metabolism and DNA methylation: a
review of the interaction between two genomes.Clin. Epigenet.12,
182 (2020).
38. Yoshioka, H. et al. Deletion of Tfam in Prx1-Cre expressing limb
mesenchyme results in spontaneous bone fractures.J. Bone Min.
Metab. 40,8 3 9– 852 (2022).
39. Stegen, S. et al. HIF-1alpha promotes Glutamine-mediated Redox
Homeostasis and glycogen-dependent bioenergetics to support
postimplantation bone cell survival.Cell Metab.23,2 6 5– 279 (2016).
40. Hirata, M. et al. Mutant IDH is sufﬁcient to initiate enchondromatosis
in mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112,2 8 2 9– 2834 (2015).
41. Zhu, X. et al. PPARgamma preservation via promoter demethylation
alleviates osteoarthritis in mice.Ann. Rheum. Dis. 78,1 4 2 0– 1429
(2019).
42. Zheng, L., Zhang, Z., Sheng, P. & Mobasheri, A. The role of meta-
bolism in chondrocyte dysfunction and the progression of
osteoarthritis.Ageing Res. Rev. 66, 101249 (2021).
43. Terpstra, L. et al. Reduced ch ondrocyte proliferation and chon-
drodysplasia in mice lacking the integrin-linked kinase in chon-
drocytes. J. Cell Biol. 162,1 3 9– 148 (2003).
44. Schneider, C. A., Rasband, W. S. & Eliceiri, K. W. NIH Image to
ImageJ: 25 years of image analysis.Nat. Methods9,6 7 1– 675 (2012).
45. Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-
image analysis. Nat. Methods 9,6 7 6– 682 (2012).
46. Saeki N. et al. Epigenetic regulator UHRF1 orchestrates proin-
ﬂammatory gene expression in rheumatoid arthritis in a suppressive
manner. J. Clin. Invest. 132, https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI150533
(2022).
47. Prieto C., Barrios D. RaNA-Seq: Interactive RNA-Seq analysis from
FASTQ ﬁles to functional analysis.Bioinformatics, https://doi.org/
10.1093/bioinformatics/btz854(2019).
48. Afgan, E. et al. The Galaxy platform for accessible, reproducible and
collaborative biomedical analyses: 2018 update.Nucleic Acids Res.
46,W 5 3 7– W544 (2018).
49. Zhou, Y. et al. Metascape provides a biologist-oriented resource for
the analysis of systems-level datasets.Nat. Commun. 10,1 5 2 3
(2019).
5 0 . B l i g h ,E .G .&D y e r ,W .J .Ar a p i dm e t h o do ft o t a ll i p i de x t r a c t i o na n d
puriﬁcation. Can. J. Biochem. Physiol. 37,9 1 1– 917 (1959).
Acknowledgements
We thank the staff at the Division of Medical Research Support, the
Advanced Research Support Center (ADRES) and the members of the
Division of Integrative Pathophysiology, Proteo-Science Center (PROS),
Ehime University, for their technical assistance and helpful support. We
would like to express our profound gratitude to Yuka Sato and Mami
Chosei of the Division of Integrative Pathophysiology, PROS and Kaori
Tanaka of the Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, for
their cooperation. This study was supported in part by the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant Number
JP20K18066 and JP24K19584 (to YY) as well as JP23689066,
JP15H04961, JP19H03786 and JP22H03203 (to YI). This study was also
supported in part by a grant from the Research Support Project for Life
Science and Drug Discovery (Basis for Supporting Innovative Drug Dis-
covery and Life Science Research (BINDS)) from AMED (Grant Number
JP24ama121055). This work was performed as part of the MEXT Coop-
erative Research Project Program, Medical Research Center Initiative for
High-Depth Omics, and CURE: JPMXP1323015486 for the Medical Insti-
tute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University.
Author contributions
Y.Y. and Y. Imai planned the study and designed the experiments. M.T.,
Y. Izumi and T.B. performed mass spectrometry analyses and T.K. and
M.T. collected and provided human samples. Y.Y. performed all
experiments and subsequent analyses with support and advice from the
co-authors. Y.Y. and Y. Imai wrote the manuscript with input from the co-
authors. In particular, T.B. provided valuable advice regarding mass
spectrometry analyses, while M.T. provided valuable advice regarding
experiments involving human samples.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Yuuki Imai.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks Guo-Xin Ni,
Noriaki Ono, and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution
to the peer review of this work. A peer review ﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicatedotherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65145-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:9492 15