=== PAGE 1 ===
Ann. rheum. Dis. (1974), 33, 536
Tissue gold levels after chrysotherapy*
R. GRAHAME,
R. BILLINGS, M. LAURENCE,
V. MARKS,
AND
P.
J. WOOD
From Guy's Arthritis Research Unit, and the Department ofBiochemistry, University ofSurrey
Although the use of gold salts in the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis is well established, the mode of
action is still not known. The finding that gold is
taken
up
by
synovial
tissue
macrophages
and
accumulates in the lysosomes (Persellin and Ziff,
1966) has led to speculation that perhaps
it acts
either by
lysosome stabilization,
as does hydro-
cortisone (Weissmann and Thomas, 1963), or by the
inhibition of the lysosomal enzymes, acid phospha-
tase, /J-glucuronidase, and cathepsin, as is known to
occur in vitro (Ennis, Granda, and Posner, 1968).
These mechanisms would presuppose a site of action
of gold within the synovial membrane and cavity.
Yet information on the quantitative aspects of gold
deposition
in the body during chrysotherapy
is
scanty, and such data as there are suggest that the
bulk of the gold both in man (Gottlieb, Smith, and
Smith, 1972) and in animals (Betrand, Waine, and
Tobias, 1948) is selectively concentrated in the lymph
nodes, liver, and bone marrow, with relatively small
concentrations in articular structures.
This report concerns a study of tissue gold con-
centrations in synovium, striated muscle, bone, and
fat in patients who have received chrysotherapy, and
is part of a larger study set up to attempt to define
those factors which might improve the success rate
of this form of therapy.
Methods and materials
Small specimens of synovial membrane, striated muscle,
bone, and fat were removed from sixteen patients who had
previously received gold injections and were undergoing
surgery as part of their planned programme of combined
medicosurgical management. For obvious reasons it was
not possible to examine specimens of all four tissues in all
patients. However, it was possible to compare the gold
content in synovium with that in one of the other tissues
(muscle, bone, or fat) on 28 occasions and relate these
findings to the individual patient's total gold dosage and
the interval since the last injection.
DETERMINATION OF TISSUE GOLD LEVELS
Tissue samples (300-500 mg) were weighed into tared
porcelain crucibles and dry-ashed overnight at 450°C. The
crucibles were re-weighed after cooling, and the residues
were dissolved in 1-0 ml of 0-1 N nitric acid solution.
Gold levels in tissue digests were measured by com-
parison with gold chloride standard solution (0-500
pg/100 ml in 0-1 N HNO3), using a Perkin-Elmer Model
303 Atomic absorption spectrophotometer. Results were
expressed as pg gold/g wet weight tissue.
Results (Tables)
In each of the three comparisons (synovium/muscle,
synovium/bone, and synovium/fat) the patients were
divided into two groups. Group I consisted ofpatients
who were currently receiving gold injections, the
mean interval since last injection was measured in
weeks. Group II consisted of patients who had not
received gold injections for some years. Fortunately,
the mean total dose of gold administered to the two
groups was similar in each of the three comparisons.
Table I shows a comparison of synovial gold levels
with those in striated muscle. In group I, comprising
five patients, the ratio of the mean of the synovial
Table I
Comparison ofgold levels in synovium and striated muscle
Group
No.
Mean totalgoldgiven (g)
Mean interval since last
Mean tissue gold level (puglg)
(range)
injection (range)
Synovium
Muscle
(range)
(range)
I
5
1-46
4-2 wks
23-82
2-96
(0-28-4-42)
(1-8)
(0-26-76)
(0-39-6)
II
6
1-38
4-1 yrs
0-45
1-00
(0-343-2)
(1-9)
(0-1*2)
(0-1-7)
Accepted for publication May 10, 1974.
* Paper read to the Heberden Society February 22, 1974.
Address correspondence to Dr. R. Grahame, Arthritis Research Unit, Guy's Hospital, London SE1 9RT.
group.bmj.com
 on March 8, 2015 - Published by 
http://ard.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 

=== PAGE 2 ===
Tissue gold levels after chrysotherapy
537
Table H
Comparison ofgold levels in synovium and bone
Group
No.
Mean total gold given (g)
Mean interval since last
Mean tissue gold level (pg/g)
(range)
injection (range)
Synovium
Bone
(range)
(range)
I
5
2*13
3*6 wks
19-26
2-20
(0.28-4.42)
(1.5-8)
(0.19-76)
(0.19-4.4)
II
4
2*19
10-3 yrs
0-80
0-87
(1.2-4.0)
(1-28)
(0-1.3)
(0-2.6)
Table m
Comparison ofgold levels in synovium andfat
Group
No.
Mean totalgoldgiven (g)
Mean interval since last
Mean tissue gold level (pglg)
(range)
injection (range)
Synovium
Fat
(range)
(range)
I
4
1-97
5-4 wks
20*14
1-27
(0.28-4.42)
(1.5-8)
(0.25-76)
(0-07-3-2)
II
4
1.19
3-17 yrs
1-76
1-22
(0.34-2.22)
(0.7-9)
(0-5.94)
(0-4.3)
levels to the mean of the muscle levels was 8-05:1,
whereas in group II, comprising six patients, the
corresponding ratio was 0-45:1. Using Wilcoxon's
nonparametric ranking test on the synovial: muscle
*ratios for individual patients in the two groups, the
difference between the two groups was significant at
the 1% level. Tables II and III show the results of
the
synovium/bone
and
synovium/fat
content,
respectively. The ratio of the mean synovium gold
ratio to that of bone and fat in group I was 8-75 and
15-8, whereas in group lI the corresponding ratios
were 0-92 and 14, respectively.
However, using the same statistical technique as
with the synovial/muscle comparison, the difference
between groups I and II was not statistically signi-
ficant in either case.
Discussion
Recent years have seen a number of attempts to place
chrysotherapy on a more rational basis in order to
improve efficacy and minimize side effects. Most
workers have concentrated on measuring serum gold
levels,
but
despite two reports
to the contrary
(Krusius, Markkanen, and Peltola, 1970; Lorber,
Atkins, Chang, Lee, Starrs, and Bovy, 1973), the
overwhelming weight of opinion (Gerber, Paulus,
Bluestone, and Pearson, 1972; Jessop and Johns,
1973; Lidsky, Sharp, Duffy, Masri, and Seibert,
1973; Yamanaka, Miyagi, Mita, and Yamasaki,
1973), including our own (Billings, Grahame, Marks,
Wood, and Taylor, 1974), is that clinical response
does not relate to circulating blood gold levels. As
yet little attention has been paid to tissue levels.
Clearly tissue gold levels are unlikely to prove a
practicable procedure in monitoring gold therapy in
individual patients, but their study could help to
elucidate some of the mystery that enshrouds gold
therapy at the present time. Of factors likely to
influence gold deposition in synovial membrane,
both the total dose of gold salt injected and the
interval since the last injection are likely to be
important. In the present study, by taking groups
whose mean total dose of gold injected was almost
identical, it was possible to 'neutralize' the effect of
total dose and thereby show the substantial fall that
occurs in synovial tissue concentration of gold when
injections are discontinued. This may explain the
well known observation
that relapse sometimes
occurs when chrysotherapy is discontinued and may
be obviated by continuous 'maintenance' therapy
(Ziff and Baum, 1972). Furthermore, by the con-
current analysis of specimens ofa nonarticular tissue,
i.e. striated muscle, bone, or fat, it has been possible
to show seeming selective deposition of gold in
synovial tissue during 'active' chrysotherapy. It has
yet to be determined whether there
is selective
retention ofgold in muscle, bone, and fat, or preferen-
tial loss of gold from the synovium, after chryso-
therapy has been discontinued.
Summary
Tissue gold concentrations were measured in speci-
mens of synovium, striated muscle, bone, and fat
obtained
at
operation from groups
of patients
suffering from rheumatoid arthritis who had received
a similar mean total dose of gold by intramuscular
injection. In the groups ofpatients who were currently
group.bmj.com
 on March 8, 2015 - Published by 
http://ard.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 

=== PAGE 3 ===
538
Annals ofthe Rheumatic Diseases
receiving injections the mean synovial gold level
exceeded the muscle, bone, and fat gold levels by
ratios of 8 05, 8 75, and 15-80, respectively, whereas in
the groups of patients whose chrysotherapy had been
discontinued some years earlier the corresponding
ratios were 045, 0-92, and 1N4, respectively.
These results may provide a rational basis for
adequate long-term maintenance chrysotherapy in
the management of rheumatoid arthritis.
DISCUSSION
DR. B. VERNON-ROBERTS (London)
In your first group
it was only a matter of weeks since the last dose of gold
had been given and since one knows that, in patients
who have had the total dose of gold that you had given,
the serum gold would be high at that time, it is not sur-
prising that the wet synovial tissue would have a high total
gold level. I think also that your conclusions may be a bit
awry in relation to the loss of gold from the tissue. John
Jessop and I have been carrying out a study of gold
distribution throughout the body in twenty
cases at
autopsy and in another twenty cases after synovectomy,
using a photochemical technique. In synovial tissue from
a patient receiving gold, who has had 3j g already, the
surface
layer has black deposits which
indicate
the
presence of gold. However, in a patient who has been on
gold, the last time 3 years previously, the deposits of gold
are in the deeper tissues, and in a patient who had 3j g
of gold but has not had gold for 5 years there are heavy
deposits in the deeper tissues in the synovium. We have
confirmed with neutron activation analysis studies that,
in some cases, up to 20 years after gold therapy heavy
amounts persist in the synovium. We must not ingore that
gold spreads throughout the body. After long periods of
treatment and a long interval since treatment, heavy
deposits of gold may be present in the kidney, semini-
ferous tubules, adrenal cortex, spleen, liver, and bone
marrow.
DR. BILLINGS
This is the sort of work we would have
liked to have done. I would agree that it appears that when
gold is given initially the synovial fluid and serum gold
levels equilibrate soon after injection and one can detect
high concentrations of gold in synovial fluid shortly
afterwards, so that would perhaps explain why you are
getting surface gold deposition initially and concentration
of gold in the deeper structures of the synovium later. I
agree also that gold is deposited throughout the body,
and we have found high concentrations of gold in many
other tissues, even after periods of 10-20 years. I am not
sure how you can correlate a slide of a tissue with gold in
it with the actual gold concentration as measured by our
method. We found that we had three patients who had
had no gold in any of their tissues detectable by our
method. You might be interested to know ofthese patients,
one had gone 2 years since the last injection and had only
been given 340 mg; the second patient had not had gold
for 13 years and had had 1 g, and the third patient had had
his last injection 28 years before and had had 4 g. So there
is a suggestion that the less you are given the quicker it is
gone.
PROF.
E. G.
L. BYWATERS (Taplow)
I gather your
analysis was not on fat-free synovium. It seems possible
that fat, with a low content of gold, might affect your
results.
DR. BILLINGS
It is extremely hard to separate the two,
and perhaps it does alter the figures.
DR. A. G. S. HILL (Stoke Mandeville)
To pursue Dr.
Vernon-Roberts's theme, a short paper was presented by
Nunn and Tribe (1963) to this Society many years ago
dealing with two patients in whom the gold was not only
demonstrable in lymphatic channels in muscle by photo-
histochemical methods, but was visible in plain radio-
graphs of the upper arm muscles taken many years after
the last injection of gold, thus providing another instance
of its persistence in large quantities.
DR. BILLINGS
I think this is one of the points of the
paper. Muscle does seem to be more selective in its
concentration of gold than other tissues.
DR. A. G. S. HILL (Stoke Mandeville)
In our cases the
muscle was taken from near the site of injections.
DR. J. H. G L YN (London)
If, as it seems, the implications
of your remarks are that the response of the synovial
membrane depends to some extent on the concentration
of the gold in the membrane, it gives some justification
to the treatment when you have monoarticular or peri-
articular arthritis of introducing the gold directly into the
cavity. This does not seem to have caught on. I have
occasionally used it with, I think, success. I would like to
know what your views would be on propagating this as a
method of treatment.
DR. BILLINGS
I would think that one of the dangers of
putting gold straight into the synovial fluid is that it may
not be the same form of gold as that injected into muscle
and then transported to the joint. I think that it is the
nature of the transported gold which is little understood,
and we are following this up with the University of Surrey
in order to see whether we can finally identify the nature of
sodium aurothiomalate (Myocrisin) after injection and
its arrival at tissue sites. So I think it would be wrong to
assume that you were doing the same intra-articularly as
intramuscularly.
DR. M. MCMAHON (Cork)
In relation to Dr. Glyn's
remark, I have used it on ten cases intra-articularly in knee
joints. The most recent case had trouble with one knee
and I gave him 10 mg on one occasion to the knee joint.
He has been symptom free now for 6 months. I have done
this on at least seven or eight occasions and each time the
knee joint seemed to be the most successful. I tried it on
shoulder and wrist joints, but the knee joint seems to
respond the best.
DR. BILLINGS
I think this is a very interesting comment
and obviously something one should follow up.
Reference
Nunn, L., and Tribe, C. R. (1963) Ann. rheum. Dis., 22, 56 (Persistence
of gold in muscle (Abst.))
group.bmj.com
 on March 8, 2015 - Published by 
http://ard.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 

=== PAGE 4 ===
Tissue gold levels after chrysotherapy
539
References
BETRAND, J. J., WAINE, H., AND TOBIAS, C. A. (1948) J. Lab. clin. Med., 33, 1133 (Distribution of gold in the animal
body in relation to arthritis)
BILLINGS, R., GRAHAME, R., MARKS, V., WOOD, P. J., AND TAYLOR, A. (1974) Rheum. and Rehab. (In press)
(Blood and urine levels during chrysotherapy for rheumatoid arthritis)
ENsIS, R. S., GRANDA, J. L., AND POSNER, A. S. (1968) Arthr. and Rheum., 11, 756 (Effect of gold salts and other
drugs on the release and activity of lysosomal hydrolases)
GERBER, R. C., PAULUS, H. E., BLUESTONE, R., AND PEARSON, C. M. (1972) Ann. rheum. Dis., 31, 308 (Clinical
response and serum gold levels in chrysotherapy)
GOTTLIEB, N. L., SMITH, P. M., AND SMITH, E. M. (1972) Arthr. and Rheum., 15, 16 (Tissue gold concentration in a
rheumatoid arthritic receiving chrysotherapy)
JESsop, J. D., AND JOHNS, R. G. S. (1973) Ann. rheum. Dis., 32, 228 (Serum gold determinations in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis receiving sodium aurothiomalate)
KRuSIuS, F. E., MARKKANEN, D., AND PELTOLA, P. (1970) Ibid., 29, 232 (Plasma levels and urinary excretion of gold
during routine treatment of rheumatoid arthritis)
LIDSKY, M. D., SHARP, J. T., DUFFY, J., MAsRi, A. F., AND SEIBERT, B. (1973) Excerpta Medica International
Congress Series, No. 299. XIII International Congress ofRheumatology, Abst. 136. (Relationship of gold dose
and serum levels to response in rheumatoid arthritis)
LORBER, A., ATKINS, C. J., CHANG, C. C., LEE, Y. B., STARRS, J., AND Bovy, R. A. (1973) Ann. rheum. Dis., 32, 133
(Monitoring serum gold values to improve chrysotherapy in rheumatoid arthritis)
PERSELLIN, R. H., AND ZIFF, M. (1966) Arthr. and Rheum., 9, 57 (The effect of gold salt on lysosomal enzymes of the
peritoneal macrophage)
WEISSMANN, G., AND THOMAS, L. (1963) J. clin. Invest., 42, 661 (Studies of lysosomes. II. The effect of cortisone on
the release of acid hydrolases from a large granule fraction of rabbit liver induced by an excess of vitamin A)
YAMANAKA, K., MIYAGI, S., MITA, M., AND YAMASAKI, S. (1973) Excerpta Medica International Congress Series,
No. 299. XIII International Congress ofRheumatology, Abst. No. 137. (Therapeutic response and serum gold
levels in long-term gold therapy)
ZIFF, M., AND BAUM, J. (1972) 'Gold therapy for rheumatoid arthritis', in 'Arthritis and Allied Conditions',
ed. J. L. Hollander and D. J. McCarty, 8th ed., p. 455. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia
group.bmj.com
 on March 8, 2015 - Published by 
http://ard.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 

=== PAGE 5 ===
chrysotherapy.
Tissue gold levels after
P J Wood
R Grahame, R Billings, M Laurence, V Marks and
doi: 10.1136/ard.33.6.536
1974 33: 536-539 
Ann Rheum Dis 
 
http://ard.bmj.com/content/33/6/536.citation
at: 
Updated information and services can be found
These include:
service
Email alerting
corner of the online article. 
this article. Sign up in the box at the top right 
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite
Notes
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions
To request permissions go to:
http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform
To order reprints go to:
http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/
To subscribe to BMJ go to:
group.bmj.com
 on March 8, 2015 - Published by 
http://ard.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
