=== PAGE 1 ===
AUROSOME FORMATION I N ARTICULAR TISSUES AFTER 
PARENTERAL ADMINISTRATION OF GOLD 
A. F. ORYSCHAK 
AND F. N. GHADIALLY 
Department of Pathology, University Hospital, University of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada 
PLATES LXXVII AND LXXVIII 
SOLUBLE 
gold salts have been used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis 
for over 40 yr. 
Currently the common route of administration of these 
compounds is parenteral rather than intra-articular. We are aware of only 
two ultrastructural studies (Norton, Lewis and Ziff, 1968; Oryschak and 
Ghadially, 1974) which have been performed in experimental animal with 
the object of determining the morphology and distribution of gold deposits 
in articular tissues after injection of sodium aurothiomalate (Myochrysine). 
However, in both these studies sodium aurothiomalate was administered 
as a single dose intra-articularly. These studies demonstrate that, (1) gold 
deposits occur within single membrane lysosomal bodies, (2) they have a 
characteristic morphology which permits their easy identification and (3) gold 
can be unequivocally demonstrated in such bodies by electron probe X-ray 
analysis. Hence the term “ aurosome” has been coined to describe these 
characteristic bodies containing gold. 
The object of this study was to mimic, in the experimental animal, the 
therapeutic regime employed in cases of rheumatoid arthritis and find out if 
parenterally administered gold produces changes similar to those seen after 
intra-articular injection. 
MATERIAL 
AND METHODS 
Two groups of white rabbits of both sexes were used in this experiment: (1) six mature 
rabbits aged 12 to 18 mth, weighing 8 to 12 pounds and (2) six immature rabbits aged 3 to 
4 mth weighing 4 to 6 pounds. A commercially obtained solutioncontaining 25 mg/ml of 
sodium aurothiomalate (PH 6.9) was used as supplied. Each animal received 20 intramuscular 
injections; one per week, at a dose of 0.8 mg/kg of body weight. This simulates the regime 
commonly employed for human patients with rheumatoid arthritis in the initial loading phase 
of chrysotherapy. 
Two weeks after the last injection of the drug the animals were killed by an intracardiac 
injection of sodium pentothal. The right knee was opened and samples of synovial membrane 
and articular cartilage from the medial femoral condyle were collected and fixed for 1 hr 
in cold 2 per cent. glutaraldehyde buffered in cacodylate (pH 7.3). They were then post-fixed 
for 1 hr in 2 per cent. osmium buffered in cacodylate (PH 7.3), dehydrated in increasing 
concentrations of ethanol, cleared in propylene oxide, embedded in epon and cut with 
diamond knives in Porter-Blum microtomes. Ultrathin sections were mounted on copper 
grids, stained with uranyl acetate and lead hydroxide and examined with the Zeiss EM-9S 
electron microscope. 
Received 13 Aug. 1975; accepted 2 Sept. 1975. 
J. PATH.-VOL. 
119 (1976) 
183 

=== PAGE 2 ===
184 
A. F. ORYSCHAK AND F. N. GHADIALLY 
RESULTS 
Examination of synovial membrane from both the mature and immature 
rabbits disclosed the presence of characteristic aurosomes in the synovial 
intimal cells (figs. 1-3) and in the subsynovial macrophages. Despite a diligent 
search in many ultrathin sections no structure even remotely resembling an 
aurosome was detected in the chondrocytes of mature animals but these 
characteristic bodies were found in the chondrocytes of immature animals 
(figs. 4 and 5). However, it is worth noting that only a few chondrocytes in 
Zones I1 and I11 contained aurosomes, none were seen in Zone I chondrocytes. 
The aurosomes seen in this experiment were similar to those reported to 
occur after intra-articular injection of Myochrysine (Oryschak and Ghadially). 
These single membrane bound bodies contain highly electron-dense membranous 
material which presents as small irregular sheets in en face view and as rod- 
like and curled structures (figs. 2, 3 and 5) which we interpret as oblique or 
transverse sections through sheets or compacted sheets viewed in profile. 
Such sheets are studded with highly electron-dense coarse granules and fine 
particles which are often difficult to demonstrate adequately because of the 
electron-density of the osmicated and stained membranous formations. 
Aurosomes in both synovial membrane and cartilage at times contained also 
one or more lipid droplets (figs. 4 and 5). 
DISCUSSION 
The results of our experiment show that intramuscularly administered 
sodium aurothiomaIate produces aurosomes of a morphology similar to that 
seen after intra-articular injection of gold (Norton et al., 1968; Oryschak and 
Ghadially, 1974). However, it is our impression that fewer aurosomes develop 
when the intramuscular route of administration is employed and generally 
most of them are smaller in size as compared to those produced when soluble 
gold salt is administered intra-articularly. 
In the synovial membrane no 
difference in distribution could be detected, in that aurosomes were found both 
in the synovial intimal cells and in subsynovial macrophages. 
In the case of the articular cartilage, however, the situation is different, 
in that intra-articularly injected gold salt produced aurosomes in Zones I 
and I1 chondrocytes, while intramuscularly administered gold salt produces 
aurosomes in Zones I1 and I11 chondrocytes but chondrocytes of Zone I are 
spared. Such a distribution of aurosomes in articular cartilage, and the fact 
that after intramuscular injection aurosomes form only in the cartilage of the 
immature but not the mature animal, supports the idea that intramuscularly 
administered gold reaches the chondrocytes via the blood vessels in underlying 
bone rather than via the synovial fluid. 
It has long been recognised (Collins, 1949) that in the immature animal 
the articular cartilage is nourished both from the synovial fluid and from the 
blood supply in the underlying bone, but in the mature animal where the 
calcified zone (Zone IV) is fully developed the diffusion of nutrients from 
underneath seizes completely or almost completely, and the cartilage is 
nourished by the synovial fluid. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
ORYSCHAK 
AND GHADIALLY 
JOINTS AFTER GOLD ADMINlSTKATlON 
PLATE LXXVII 
FIG. 1 .-A 
superficially placed synovial cell containing an aurosome (arrow). Joint space J. 
x 38,500. 
FIG. 2.-High-power view of aurosome shown in 
FIG. 3.-Aurosome 
from a synovial intimal cell 
fig. 1. Note the granule-studded membranes 
showing characteristic electron-dense contents 
(arrow). x 102,000. 
and lipid droplets (arrow). x 57,000. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
ORYSCHAK 
AND GHADIALLY 
JOINTS AFTER GOLD ADMINISTRATION 
PLATE 
LXXVITI 
FIG. 4.-Two 
aurosomes (arrows) found in a chondrocyte. x 21,000. 
FIG. 5.-High 
power of aurosome shown in fig. 4. Besides the granule-studded membranes this 
aurosome also contains lipid droplets (L). x 132,000. 

=== PAGE 5 ===
JOINTS AFTER GOLD ADMINISTRATION 
185 
Support for the above-mentioned concepts comes also from the studies 
of Brower and Hsu (1969) who found that radioactive tracers injected into 
subchondral bone diffuse rapidly into the cartilage of immature rabbits but 
not at all in the mature animal, and that the calcified zone does in fact act 
as an effective barrier between cartilage and bone. 
Our studies are also in keeping with the light-microscopic studies of Brighton, 
Bigley and Smolenski (1970) who showed that intramuscularly administered 
iron dextran leads to haemosiderin deposits in the synovial membrane of both 
mature and immature rabbits, but that such deposits occur only in the chondro- 
cytes of immature animals but not mature animals. 
The situation regarding the rheumatoid synovial membrane in patients 
treated with gold parenterally is somewhat different, in that the bulk of the 
gold deposits in the synovial membrane are found to be localised in pre- 
existing lysosomes and only a few " de n o w y' aurosomes of the type illustrated 
in this paper develop after chrysotherapy (Ghadially, Oryschak and Mitchell, 
in press). Whether aurosomes occur in the chondrocytes of these patients is 
not known, but one could argue on the basis of the present study that in 
juvenile cases aurosomes may form in the chondrocytes but that such an event 
is unlikely in adult patients. 
S-Y 
Intramuscular injection of sodium aurothiomalate (Myochrysine) produced 
lysosomes (aurosomes) of a characteristic morphology distinct and different 
from other lysosomes. The aurosome is characterised by particle and granule- 
studded electron-dense membranous formations which present as rod-like and 
curled structures. 
Intramuscularly injected sodium aurothiomalate in immature rabbits leads 
to the production of aurosomes in the articular cartilage chondrocytes and 
synovial intimal cells and subsynovial macrophages. In mature rabbits 
aurosomes develop only in the synovial intimal cells and subsynovial mqcro- 
phages, but not in the chondrocytes. 
This work was supported by grants from the Canadian Arthritis and Rheumatism Society 
and the Medical Research Council of Canada. We are indebted to Poulenc Ltd, Montreal, 
Canada, for the supply of Myochrysine. 
REFERENCES 
BRIGHTON, 
D. T., BIGLEY, 
E. C., JR, AM) SMOLENSKI, 
B. I. 1970. Iron induced arthritis in 
immature rabbits. Arthritis Rheum., 13, 849. 
BROWER,T. 
D.,AND 
Hsu, U. 1969. Normal articular cartilage. Clin. Ortho. related Res., 64,9. 
COLLINS, D. H. 1949. The pathology of articular and spinal diseases, Edward Arnold, 
London. 
GHADIALLY, 
F. N., ORYSCHAK, 
A. F., AND MITCHELL, 
D. A. 1976. Ultrastructural changes 
produced in the rheumatoid synovial membrane by chrysotherapy. Am. rheum. Dis., 
in press. 
NORTON, 
W. L., LEWIS, D. C., AND ZIFF, M. 1968. Electron-dense deposits following 
injection of gold sodium thiornalate and thiomalic acid. Arthritis Rherrm., 11,436. 
ORYSCHAK, 
A. F., AND GHADIALLY, 
F. N. 1974. Aurosomes in rabbit articular cartilage. 
Virchows Arch. B. Cell Path., 17, 159. 
