=== PAGE 1 ===
Virchows Arch. B Cell Path. 17, 159--168 (1974) 
9 by Springer-Verlag 1974 
Aurosomes in Rabbit Articular Cartilage* 
A. F. Oryschak and F. N. Ghadially 
Department of Pathology, University Hospital, University of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatoon, Canada 
Received October 1O, 1974 
Summary. Intra-articular injections of sodium aurothiomalate (Myochrysine) into rabbit 
knee joints produced lysosomes (aurosomes) of a characteristic morphology in the chondro- 
cytes of articular cartilage. Such lysosomes are morphologically distinct from other lysosomes 
and those seen in joints injected with sodium thiomalate. With the aid of electron probe 
x-ray analysis, gold and phosphorus have been demonstrated in the aurosomes. Numerous 
coated vacuoles developed in chondrocytes from joints injected with sodium aurothiomalatc. 
It is thought that these vacuoles were involved in the transport of a gold-protein complex 
and that the aurosomes evolved from the coalescence of such vacuoles with primary lysosomes. 
Although gold salts are widely used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, 
little is known about the morphology and distribution of gold deposits in articular 
tissues after administration of soluble gold salts. We are aware of only one ultra- 
structural study (Norton et al., 1968) reporting on the occurrence of gold deposits 
in rabbit synovial membrane after intra-articular injection of sodium aurothio- 
malate. Whether such deposits occur also in the chondrocytes of articular cartilage 
is not known. 
Norton et al. (1968), found that after injection of sodium aurothiomalate into 
the joint characteristic electron dense deposits consisting of aggregates of fila- 
mentous and granular material develop within single membrane bound bodies 
acceptable as lysosomes. However, similar lysosomal bodies were found after the 
injection of thiomalic acid into the joint. Although the authors state that, 
"Close inspection indicated that the deposits after thiomalic acid may not be 
identical to the deposits which result from gold salt administration", it is not 
at all clear what these differences are. 
Thus it would appear that unequivocal identification intracellular gold 
deposits may be difficult on morphological grounds alone. With the recently 
developed technique of electron probe x-ray analysis it is now possible to obtain 
an elemental analysis on small areas within the cell. The development of this 
technology has encouraged us to investigate the composition of intra-articular 
gold deposits. In this paper we report on the occurrence of gold deposits in the 
chondrocytes of rabbit articular cartilage and their unequivocal identification by 
electron probe x-ray analysis. Since the presence of gold has now been demon- 
strated by us in these bodies we propose to call these structures "aurosomes", 
by analogy with siderosomes which contain haemosiderin. 
* This work was supported by grants from the Medical Research Council of Canada and the 
Canadian Arthritis and Rheumatism Society. We are indebted to Poulenc Ltd., Montreal, 
Canada for the supply of Myochrysine. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
160 
A.F. Oryschak and F. N. Ghadially 
Materials and Methods 
Sixteen white rabbits of both sexes, aged 3 to 4 months, ranging in weight from 4 to 
6 pounds, were used in this experiment. These animals were divided into two groups. The 
experimental group (10 rabbits) received intra-articular injections of sodium aurothiomalate 
into the right knee joint the control animals (6 rabbits) received intra-articular injections 
of sodium thiomalate. The dosage and the interval from the last injection to collection of 
tissues is presented in Table 1. 
When larger doses, such as 25 or 50 mg, were employed the material was divided into 
two or three doses and administered over a period of two or three days. This was done so as 
to avoid undue distention of the joint by a large volume of fluid. The commercial solution 
of sodium aurothiomalate (Myochrysine, 25 mg/ml, supplied by Poulenc Ltd., Montreal, 
Canada) was used as supplied. We found the pH to be 6.9. The sodium thiomalate solution 
used as a control was prepared by reacting 0.1 N NaOH with mercaptosuccinic acid to yield 
a solution with a pH of 6.9 and a concentration of 25 mg/ml. 
Animals were killed by an intracardiac injection of sodium pentothal. The right knee 
joint was opened by reflecting the patella distalwards exposing the femoral condyles. Articular 
cartilage from the injected knees was collected and processed in the following way. 
Table 1 
Compound 
Dose 
Number 
Interval between last 
administered 
of rabbits 
dose and collection 
of cartilage 
Myochrysine 
50 nag 
2 
3 days 
Myochrysine 
25 mg 
2 
1 week 
Myochrysine 
25 mg 
2 
4 weeks 
Myochrysine 
10 mg 
2 
2 weeks 
Myochrysine 
10 mg 
1 
1 week 
Myochrysine 
1 mg 
1 
3 days 
Sodium thiomalate 
25 mg 
6 
3 days 
Electron Microscopy 
A thin shaving of articular cartilage from the weight-bearing portion of the medial femoral 
condyle passing just superficial to the calcified zone was taken and immediately placed in 
cold 2 per cent glutaraldehyde buffered in cacodylate (pH 7.3). After 1 hour the piece of 
cartilage was trimmed into strips about 3 to 4 mm long and 1 mm wide. Most of these were 
post fixed in 2 per cent osmium buffered in cacodylate (pH 7.3); but in some instances this 
step was omitted. 
Tissues were then dehydrated in increasing concentrations of alcohol, cleared in propylene 
oxide, embedded in Epon and cut with diamond knives in Porter-Blum microtomes. Ultrathin 
sections approximately 600 A thick were mounted on copper grids, stained with nranyl 
acetate and lead hydroxide and examined with the Zeiss EM-9S electron microscope. A few 
unstained sections were also examined. 
X-Ray Analysis 
A further set of sections, i 000 to 1500 A thick, were prepared for electron probe x-ray 
analysis using a scanning electron microscope (Cambridge Stereoscan) in the transmission 
mode and an energy dispersive x-ray analysis system (EDAX Internation Inc.). The sections 
used for x-ray analysis (osmicated specimens) were examined either unstained or stained 
with uranium. 
The method of x-ray analysis was as follows. A grid bearing a section of cartilage was 
placed in a stage specially adapted to give a transmission image with the scanning microscope. 

=== PAGE 3 ===
Aurosomes in Cartilage 
161 
The image as seen on the cathode ray screen is similar to that seen in the common transmission 
microscope but the quality of the image is somewhat poorer. When an area of interest such 
as an aurosome (target) is located, the scanning beam is stopped and adjusted to lie within 
the center of the target. X-ray counts were then collected for a period of 200 seconds live- 
time and the spectrum thus obtained was displayed on a cathode ray tube and recorded 
photographically. The counts in each channel were also printed out on a paper tape. For 
control purposes spectra were also obtained from the background, that is to say from small 
areas in the adjacent cytoplasm. Such pairs of target and background spectra were analyzed 
as indicated later. 
Results 
Gross Examination 
Examination of the knee joints at arthrotomy revealed normal, white, lustrous 
articular cartilage. The synovial membrane did not appear grossly inflammed or 
discoloured. The appearance was similar in all control and experimental joints. 
Electron Microscopic Examination 
Two note-worthy phenomena were found in the chondrocytes from joints 
injected with sodium aurothiomalate; (1) the occurrence of single membrane 
bound lysosomal bodies (aurosomes) with a characteristic morphology (Figs. 1 to 3) 
+ "+p, +x 
9 
/'+ 
, 
+ 
~+ 
. 
+++ 
++ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
..+..~ 
.+.. 
9 
P' .
.
.
.
 
~P~+ 
~+'+" +~+ 
"+ 
" 
,,,.I 
. + 
.++.+- 
+.+., +++ '+ 
+* 
+ ~+ 
+J+'~++ 
, 
++~+++ r 
9 +'P++~ 
; + 
:.++mi~ 
~. 
+ 
9 + 
~* ++ 
+.~., +; 
9 
+ 
" 
.. 
- 
+ 
+ 
+,.+ 
t 
+ 
+., + 
Fig. 1. Chondrocyte containing numerous single membrane bound aurosomes (A) with electron 
dense contents. Also seen are the moderately distended cisternae (C) of the rough endo- 
ptasmie reticulum and normal looking Golgi complex (G) and mitochondria (M). • 
U 
Virchows 
Arch. 
B 
Cell 
Path., 
Vol. 
17 

=== PAGE 4 ===
162 
A.F. Oryschak and F. N. Ghadially 
-
-
 
* +~': <" ~r 
~', 
R 
: 
Fig. 2. Aurosome bounded by a single trilaminar membrane (arrowheads). The membranous 
structures (arrows) within the aurosome are studded with innumerable dense particles which 
are difficult to discern. Note also the highly electron dense rod-like (R) and curled formations 
(C). • 
and (2) the occurrence of fuzzy or coated vacuoles (Figs. 4 and 5). Neither of 
these phenomena were witnessed in joints injected with sodium thiomalate, but 
there appeared to be a slight increase in the number of single membrane bound 
dense bodies acceptable as lysosomes (Fig. 6). These lysosomes however, could 
be easily distinguished from the aurosomes found in the sodium aurothiomalate 
injected joints. 
The feature which distinguishes aurosomes from other lysosomes found in 
the control joints is the occurrence within them of highly electron dense mem- 
branous material which presents as small irregular sheets in en/ace view and as 
straight rod-like or short curled structures which may be interpreted as trans- 
versely or obliquely sectioned sheets or collections of compacted sheets viewed 
in profile (Fig. 2). Such sheets are studded with highly electron dense particles 
and granules which are difficult to discern in osmicated material because of the 
high electron density of the membranous formations. These electron dense, 
presumably gold containing particles and granules, are however, clearly visualized 
in non-osmicated unstained material (Fig. 3). As is to be expected, in such prep- 

=== PAGE 5 ===
Aurosomes in Cartilage 
163 
_ ~ - - ~ 
] 
'- 
Illl .
.
.
.
.
.
 
If .... 
- 
~ 
. . . . 
r 
Dr 
Q,. 
Fig. 3. Aurosome contents as seen in unosmicated tissue not subjected to lead or uranium 
staining. The particles and granules lining the membranous formations are easily seen. 
Despite the absence of heavy metal fixation and staining these membranous formations are 
visualized probably because of their in vivo reaction with gold salts, but as may be expected 
the enveloping lysosomal membrane and the other cytomembranes and organelles are not 
visualized, x 180000 
arations the limiting membrane of this lysosomal body is not seen nor are any 
of the other cellular organelles. Besides membranous formations, particles, and 
granules, some aurosomes contained other materials such as a lipid droplet, or a 
few vesicles. 
The cartilage of every experimental animal showed aurosomes. There was a 
rough positive correlation between the dosage and the number of aurosomes, 
a few were seen even at the lowest dosage employed (1 mg of sodium aurothio- 
malate). The aurosomes usually measured approximately 0.25 ~t to 0.5 9 in 
diameter, but on rare occasions larger aurosomes measuring up to 2 ~ were seen. 
Most of the aurosomes occurred in the Zone I and II chondrocytes. At larger 
doses (25 and 50 mg) occasional aurosomes developed in Zone III chondrocytes. 
Besides the aurosomes, the other noteworthy finding was the occurrence of 
fuzzy or coated pinocytotic vacuoles arising from the plasma membrane of the 
chondrocytes. Such coated vacuoles are easily distinguished from micropino- 
cytotic vesicles commonly seen in the chondrocytes of articular cartilage, for 
the coated vacuoles are much larger and bear filamentous decorations on the 
inner and outer surface of the vacuole (Figs. 4 and 5). 
Electron Probe X-Ray Analysis 
For this study sections of cartilage from six rabbits which had received 25 or 
50 mg of sodium aurothiomalate were employed. An average of six aurosomes 
11" 

=== PAGE 6 ===
i64 
A. F. Oryschak and F. N. Ghadially 
9 ~ . ~ 
Fig. 4. Chondrocytes from a sodium aurothiomalate injected joint showing developed and 
developing coated vacuoles (arrows) and micropinocytotic vesicles (arrowheads). • 
. 
r ~j rl. 
:Fig. 5. Higher power view of much larger developing coated vacuoles than those shown in 
Fig. 4. Note the dense filamentous coat on the cytoplasmic aspect of the plasma membrane 
(arrow), and a similar coat on the external surface (arrowhead) separated from the plasma 
membrane by a less dense or lucent lamina, x 70000 
from each section were examined for the presence of gold9 In each instance when 
the aurosome was large enough and dense enough (twenty-two instances) we 
were able to obtain the characteristic gold peaks at 2.1 KeV, 9.7 KeV, and 
11.5 KeV. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
Aurosomes in Cartilage 
165 
u 
. 
Fig. 6. Lysosome from a chondrocyte of a joint injected with sodium thiomalate. This structure 
bears little resemblance to the aurosomes, x 116000 
YS" 
05@ 
HS't80EV/CH 
12, 
Fig. 7. X-ray spectra (0 to 20 KeV) obtained from an aurosome and adjacent cytoplasm of a 
chondrocyte. The dot and faint line spectrum represents the aurosome, the solid bright line 
spectrum the cytoplasm. Accelerating voltage of 30 KeV was used to obtain the spectra 
Three of the best aurosome spectra (high count rates for gold) were subjected 
to a more detailed analysis. Energy dispersive spectra obtained from one of these 
aurosomes and also from an adjacent area in the cell cytoplasm (background) 
is shown in Fig. 7. The solid spectrum represents the cytoplasm and the faint line 
and dot spectrum the aurosome. Spectra from the aurosome and background 
invariably showed also the copper peak (K:r at 8 KeV) which is generated by 
scattered electrons striking the copper grid. Since more scattered electrons are 
generated when a heavy metal containing object such as an aurosome is bombarded 
with electrons the background (including the copper peak) tends to be higher 
from the aurosome than the cytoplasm. 

=== PAGE 8 ===
166 
VS: 
A. F. Oryschak and F. N. Ghadially 
OSe 
H$ : iOOEV/CN 
J 
[: 0 
85 
I 
10 
L 
1S 
21 
Fig. 8. X-ray spectrum of an aurosome after background subtraction showing gold and 
phosphorus peaks and a few other small peaks as described in the text 
Fig. 8 shows the x-ray spectrum obtained by subtracting the background 
spectrum from the cytoplasm properly normalized to the same background level 
as the spectrum from the aurosome. Notice how the background including the 
copper peak at 8 KeV has been removed by this process. The residual spectrum 
shows three prominent peaks from gold (L~ at 9.7, Lfl at 11.5 and M at 2.1) 
and a peak at 2 KeV which represents the Kct peak of phosphorus. The numerous 
other smaller peaks represent osmium and arsenic from the fixative, uranium 
from the stain, silicon from the x-ray detector and chromium and iron from the 
microscope chamber. 
Discussion 
The results of our study clearly show that single membrane bound bodies 
with characteristic electron dense contents occur in the chondrocytes of articular 
cartilage after the injection of sodium aurothiomalate into the rabbit knee joint. 
Although there seemed to be some increase in the number of lysosomal bodies 
after the injection of sodium thiomalate, these bodies did not bear resemblance 
to the aurosomes. Indeed, bodies containing curled and straight electron dense 
structures as seen in these aurosomes have not been seen in normal or patho- 
logical chondrocytes in any other situation. Our studies therefore are not in 
keeping with those of Norton et al. (1968), who found that thiomalic acid alone 
can produce structures similar to those produced by sodium aurothiomalate in 
the synovial membrane. Whether tissue differences are responsible for this 
discrepancy remains to be established by future work. 
Formation o/ Aurosomes. The manner in which aurosomes evolve was not 
clearly established by our study, but some interesting observations were made. 
A prominent feature in the chondrocytes from sodium aurothiomalate injected 
joints was the frequent occurrence of coated vacuoles arising from the plasma 
membrane of chondrocytes. Such a phenomenon has not been noted by us or 

=== PAGE 9 ===
Aurosomes in Cartilage 
167 
others in normal or pathological chondrocytes (Ghadially and Roy, 1969). 
However, micropinocytotic vesicles bearing filamentous or spiney adornments 
on their limiting membrane have often been seen in various other cells engaged 
in protein uptake (Bessis and Breton-Gorius, 1956; Anderson, 1964 ; Roth and 
Porter, 1964; Fawcett, 1967), and terms such as fuzzy vesicles, coated vesicles, 
decorated vesicles and acanthosomes have been used to describe this type of 
endocytotic vesicle. 
Recently we have reported on the occurrence of much larger partially-coated 
pinocytotoic vacuoles which occurred in synovial cells engaged in the removal 
of fibrin from the knee joint of a patient with psoriasis, polyarthritis and multiple 
sclerosis (Ghadially et al., 1974). 
Therefore it would appear that the coated vacuoles seen in this study are also 
engaged in the transport of protein or proteinaceous material. One may hence 
speculate that we are here witnessing the uptake of a gold-protein complex, 
since gold salts are known to bind to a variety of proteins. For example it is 
thought that the transport of soluble gold salts from the injection site to the 
various organs is achieved by the binding of gold to the various plasma proteins 
(Lawrence, 1961 ; Lorber et al., 1971). 
Thus the probable sequence of events which occurs after the injection of 
Myochrysine may be visualized as follows. The injected gold binds to protein in 
the synovial fluid and that this then enters the cartilage and is picked up by the 
chondrocytes, or what is more likely, is that the soluble gold salt enters the 
cartilage and binds to some protein in the cartilage matrix. The gold-protein 
complex however derived, is then picked up by the chondrocyte by the formation 
of coated vacuoles. These then coalesce among themselves and with primary 
lysosomes to form aurosomes, or such vesicles and vacuoles are enclosed in a 
larger vacuole to form a type of multivesicular body, where the proteinaceous 
material is digested leaving behind the gold and osmiophilic membranous material 
derived from the walls of such vacuoles and vesicles. 
Composition o] Aurosomes. Atomic analysis permits the confident identifica- 
tion of the elements present but leaves one to speculate about the nature of the 
compounds formed from such elements. Our results provide unequivocal proof 
of the presence of gold here, for the characteristic peaks for gold were found in 
numerous aurosomes that were large enough to permit confident analysis. We 
interpret the very small Cr and Fe peaks as coming from the specimen chamber. 
The reason they may not be completely cancelled out by subtracting the back- 
ground spectrum is because the amount of electron scattering from the sample 
(which produces x-rays from the chamber hardware) would be expected to 
increase because of the presence of heavy elements such as Au, Os, and U in the 
area of the specimen analyzed (i.e. the aurosome). The apparent high ratio of 
Cr to Fe suggest that the x-rays may come from a chromium plated part rather 
than stainless steel in the microscope. 
We think it safe to say that there is a significant amount of Os and As in the 
final spectrum and that this reflects the presence of osmiophilic membranous 
material in the aurosome. The identification of a small phosphorus peak in the 
presence of Os and Au peaks can be difficult but in this case the P peak is quite 

=== PAGE 10 ===
168 
A.F. Oryschak and F. N. Ghadially 
large and easily distinguished, so that one has to concede that a significant 
amount of phosphorus is present in the aurosome. 
For this finding we have no clear cut explanation. It is conceivable that the 
phosphorus is combined with gold and that we are witnessing a compound of 
gold and phosphorus or, that the aurosome contains some other phosphorus 
containing material such as phospholipids. The latter suggestion would be in 
keeping with the finding of a membranous material in the aurosome. Previous 
suggestions as to the nature of gold deposits (in other sites) produced by soluble 
gold has been that the gold may occur in metallic form or as a sulphide (Koppen- 
hofer, 1936). In our case we can rule out the sulphide as no sulfur was detected, 
but the idea that Au occurs in a metallic form is consistent with our findings. 
References 
Anderson, E. : Oocyte differentiation and vitellogenesis in the roach Periplaneta americana. 
J. Cell Biol. 20, 131-150 (1964) 
Bessis, M., Brcton-Gorius, J.: Incorporation de granules ferrugineux par les erythroblastes 
observee au microscope electronique. C.R. Soc. Biol. (Paris) 150, 1903-1905 (1956) 
Fawcett, D. W. : An atlas of fine structure. The cell. Its organelles and inclusions. Saunders: 
Philadelphia and London 1967 
Ghadially, F.N., Oryschak, A. F., Mitchell, D. M.: Partially coated vacuoles--a new type 
of endocytotic structure. Experientia (Basel) 30, 649-652 (1974) 
Ghadially, F.N., Roy, S.: Ultrastructure of synovial joints in health and disease. Butter- 
worths: London 1969 
Koppenhofer: Ablagerung und Verteilung von Gold nach Zulphur Anorganischer und Organi- 
scher Goldpr~parate. Dsch. reed. Wschr. 25, 1011-1012 (1936) 
Lawrence, J. S. : Studies with radioactive gold. Ann. rheum. Dis. 20, 341-351 (1961) 
Lorber, A., Bovy, R.A., Chang, C.C.: Relationship between serum gold content and 
distribution to serum immunoglobulins and complement. Nature (Lond.) New Biol. 236, 
250-252 (1972) 
b~orton, W. L., Lewis, D. C., Ziff, M. : Electron-dense deposits following gold sodium thiomalate 
and thiomalic acid. Arth. and Rheum. 11, 436443 (1968) 
Roth, T. F., Porter, K. R. : Yolk protein uptake in the oocyte of the mosquito, Aedes aegypti. 
J. Cell Biol. 20, 313-332 (1964) 
Prof. F. N. Ghadially 
M.D., Ph.D., D. Sc. (Lond.), M.R.C. Path. 
Department of Pathology 
Room A216, Medical Building 
University of Saskatchewan 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada STN 0W8 
