=== PAGE 1 ===
Arthritis and Rheumatism 
VOL. VI, NO. 1 
FEBRUARY, 1963 
The Autoradiographic Localization and Distribution of 
Neutron Activated Gold (Aulg8) in Skeletal 
Tissues and Synovia of Mice 
By EDGAR 
A. TONNA, GEORGE 
BRECHER, 
EUGENE 
P. CRONKITE 
AND IRVING L. SCHWARTZ 
The localization and distribution of neu- 
tron activated radioactive gold in the 
long bones and knee joints of mice was 
determined autoradiographically follow- 
ing treatment of animals with gold 
thioglucose and thiomalate. Gold was 
found 1 or 2 months later at the surface 
of the synovium, the osteogenic layer 
of the perichondrial periosteum, reticulo- 
endothelial cells of the marrow and 
osteogenic cells along the surface of the 
metaphyseal trabeculae and secondary 
centers of ossification. Gold was not 
seen in cartilage. 
Le localisation e le distribution de neu- 
trono-activate auro radioactive in le os- 
sos longe e le articulationes geniculari 
de muses esseva determinate autoradio- 
graphicamente post le tractamento del 
animales con thioglucosa e thiomalato 
de auro. Auro esseva trovate 1 o 2 
menses plus tarde a1 superficie del 
synovio, le strato osteogenic del periosteo 
perichondrial, le cellulas retidoendo- 
thelial del medulla, e le cellulas osteo- 
genic a1 longo del superficie del trabecu- 
las metaphyseal, e in centros secundari 
de ossification. Nulle auro esseva trovate 
in cartilagine. 
HE USEFULNESS of chrysotherapy in rheumatoid arthritis has been 
T 
demonstratedl and detailed biochemical studies of the absorption, ex- 
cretion, and retention of gold compounds in experimental animals are avail- 
able." Yet knowledge of the localization of these compounds within joints is 
quite limited. Bertrand et a1.t using radioactive gold ( AulQ8), demonstrated 
that its concentration was similar in bone, synovium and skin when rats were 
injected with A U ~ ~ * 
sodium thiosulfate, but that the gold concentration was 
significantly increased in synovium and bone when chemical arthritis had 
been produced by intra-articular injections of turpentine. Increased deposition 
of gold in arthritic joints of man has also been rep~rted.~ 
The localization 
within the tissues, however, is unknown. Combination of activation analysis 
and autoradiography now offers the means for such exact localization. Ordinary 
gold ( Aule7) compounds may be injected and the tissues fixed at any desired 
From the Medical Research Center, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, N . Y., 
and the Laboratoq of Experimmtd Pathology, Na€kmaZ Institutes of Arthritis a d 
Metabolic Dkease, Bethesdu, Md. 
Research supported by the U. S . Atomic Energy Commission. 
1 
A~WIHITIS 
AND RHEUMATISM, VOL. 6, No. 1 ( PEERVARY), 
1963 

=== PAGE 2 ===
2 
TONNA, BRECHER, CRONKITE AND SCHWARTZ 
interval thereafter in a routine manner. Subsequent exposure of the tissues to 
a neutron source activates a fraction of Au“j7 to Ads8 which decays with a 
7-emission of 0.411 Mev and a &emission of an average energy of 0.32 MeV, and 
which can be localized by radioautography. For any given neutron exposure 
the fraction activated is constant and the density of the autoradiographic image 
is proportional to the concentration of gold. The new technic has been used 
successfully for localization of gold in mouse brains following injection of gold 
thioglucose, which produces hypothalamic lesions and obesity when given to 
mice in near lethal doses.5 The present paper reports on the localization of 
gold in the joints of mice following gold thioglucose and gold thiomalate 
injections. 
MATERIALS 
AND METHODS 
Twenty mice of the Brookhaven National Laboratory inbred strain of Swiss albino were 
used in this study. Ten mice were 1 month old and ten were 2 months of age. Four 
mice in each age group received a single intraperitoneal injection of 10 mg. of gold 
thioglucose, another four received 10 mg. of gold thiomalate. The remaining two mice in 
each group were not injected. The mice injected at 1 month of age were killed by 
decapitation 1 month later, and those injected at 2 months of age were killed 2 months 
later. The knee joints with intact femur, tibia and fibula, were removed, immersed in 
Bouin’s fixative for 24 hours, washed in running tap water overnight and placed in 80 
per cent ethyl alcohol for 8 hours. The tissue samples taken from the older animals were 
decalcified in a 10 per cent solution of Versene prior to dehydration and paraffin infiltra- 
tion. 
The further processing of tissues followed the technic previously described.6 Samples 
were placed in aluminum boats within special nylon cassettes for irradiation. Neutron 
activation was carried out in the Brookhaven National Laboratory graphite reactor for 9.5 
hours with a neutron flux of 7.5 x 1012 neutrons/cm.2/sec. in a water cooled port (tempera- 
ture 60 to 80 C . ) . The activated samples were monitored in a Penco 100 channel gamma 
spectrometer to identify the characteristic 0.411 Mev y-emission of Au19S. Tissues were 
sectioned at 5 p as soon as the radioactivity of the blocks had declined to approximately 
15 mr per hour at a distance of 2-3 inches. This level was usually reached on the 6th 
day after activation. At that time the &er highly neutron-activated elements, in particular 
sodium, had decayed sufficiently to leave A d 9 8 as the only major source of radio- 
autographic images. 
Half of the sections of the younger mice were decalcified on the slides with a solution 
of 10 per cent Versene. The bones of the older mice had been decalcified prior to em- 
bedding as already noted. All sections were dipped in NTB-3 Kodak liquid emulsion. Sets 
of sections were exposed for 24, 48 and 72 hours in a cold dry atmosphere, and subse- 
quently developed in Kodak D-19 developer, washed, fixed, then stained with hematoxylin. 
RESULTS 
Autoradiographs of gold thioglucose- and gold thiomalate-injected mice of 
each age group were similar and will therefore be reported jointly. Decalcifica- 
tion, which in younger mice could be checked against slides not treated with 
Versene, did not appear to alter the distribution or intensity of activity. 
The black silver grains, which identified the areas of radioactivity, were 
distributed as continuous lines on the surface or within bones, or as focal 
concentrations, referred to as “hot spots,” which corresponded to individual 
cells. Often broad zones of reduced silver grains contained within them denser 
focal accumulations. The underlying cells were, as a rule, obscured by the 

=== PAGE 3 ===
IN SKELETAL TISSUES AND SYNOVIA OF MICE 
3 
*U1!)R 
heavy concentration of black grains, so that the intracellular localization of 
radioactivity could only be inferred from the burst-like hot spots. The validity 
of such inference was, however, supported by the fact that such hot spots 
were seen only in cellular areas, particularly at the surface of bones (fig. 2) 
and within the marrow (fig. 4), while acellular areas of bone contained only 
continuous bands of activity (fig. 3 ) - The distributions of activity encountered 
both in mice injected at 1 month of age and killed 1 month later, and those 
injected at 2 months and killed 2 months later, were similar. Certain exceptions 
to this over-all similarity will be noted specifically. In femur, tibia, and fibula, 
bands with hot spots were prominent in the periosteum at the level of the 
metaphysis and extended toward the shaft (fig. 1). The perichondrial zone 
was most heavily involved. The activity appeared concentrated in cells of the 
osteogenic layer and little activity was seen in the fibrous portion of the peri- 
osteum (fig. 2). Within the cortex of the shaft, bands of activity were present 
some distance from the periosteal or endosteal surface and parallel to them 
(fig. 3). Toward the metaphysis, where the bands appear to follow the outline 
of perforating vessels, wave-like bands resulted (fig. 1). No activity was seen 
over osteocytes. 
Within the metaphysis, activity was principally in the form of hot spots 
within the marrow, and to a much lesser extent along the trabeculae (fig. 1). 
Only occasionally was the activity along the trabeculae prominent (fig. 4). 
The main activity, both in the marrow and along the trabeculae, was some 
distance from the epiphyseal plate and roxghly parallel to it (fig. 1). Little or 
no activity was present in the marrow cf the shaft proper. In mice killed 1 
month after injection, some activity was seen in the marrow or trabeculae in 
the immediate proximity of the epiphyseal plate, while in mice killed 2 
months after injection, the immediate neighborhood of the plate was free of 
activity. Within the secondary centers of ossification, a few hot spots were 
present in the marrow (figs. 5 and 6) and bands of activity were seen either 
on the surface of the trabecular bone or some distance from and parallel to 
the surface, resulting in concentric rings around the round or oval inter- 
trabecular spaces. In mice killed 1 month after injection, both the bands at 
the surface and within the bone were present (fig. 5 ) , while in mice killed 2 
months after injection, only the bands at some distance from the surface were 
seen. Radioactivity was not seen over cartilage. The surface of the synovium 
was frequently, but not invariably the site of bandlike activity, which ap- 
peared to consist of a row of closely approximated hot spots (fig. 7). The 
activity was commonly highest close to the menisci, was quite variable in 
general, and was not seen to extend into the suprapatellar or other recesses 
of the knee joint. 
Fat pads often contained hot spots clearly localized over individual cells 
(fig. 8). No radioactivity was noted in radioautographs of non-injected con- 
trols. 
DISCUSSION 
The identity of the activity in autoradiographs with actual sites of gold 
deposition appears established by the absence of activity in non-injected 

=== PAGE 4 ===
4 
TONNA, BRECHER, CRONKITE AND SCHWAHTZ 
Figs. 1 (above) and 2 (below) 
Fig. 1.-An 
autoradiograph of a tibia of a 2-month-old mouse killed 1 month 
after gold thioglucose administration. The tissue section was decalcified on the 
slide. Note bands of gold deposition along shaft well within bone, in osteogenic 
layer of perichondrial zone and in marrow at level of metaphysis. Hematoxylin 
stained. 
Fig. 2.-An 
autoradiograph of the periosteum at the perichondrial zone of the 
femur of a 4-month-old mouse killed 2 months following gold thioglucose ad- 
ministration. Note the intense uptake of gold by cells of the periosteum. The tissue 
sample was decalcified prior to neutron activation. Hematoxylin stained. 

=== PAGE 5 ===
AUlS8 IN SKELETAL TISSUES AND SYNOVIA OF MICE 
5 
Figs. 3 (above) and 4 (below) 
Fig. 3.-An 
autoradiograph of the femoral cortex of a femur of a 4-month-old 
mouse killed 2 months following gold thioglucose administration. Gold appears in 
periosteal and endosteal bands. The tissue was decalcified prior to neutron activa- 
tion. Hematoxylin stained. 
Fig. 4.-An 
autoradiograph of the metaphyseal region of femora from a 2- 
month-old mouse killed 1 month following gold thioglucose administration. Note 
the numerous “hot spots” representing gold in periosteal and trabecular osteoblasts 
and bone marrow macrophages. The tissue section was not decalcified. Hematoxylin 
stained. 

=== PAGE 6 ===
6 
TONNA, BRECHER, C R 0 " E AND SCHWARTZ 
Figs. 5 (above) and 6 (below) 
Fig. 5.-A 
higher power of the epi hyseal region of figure 1. Gold is seen lo- 
calized at the surfaces of trabeculae at t!e 
secondary centers of ossification. Cartilage 
cells of both the articulating surfaces and epiphyseal plate are non-labeled. Hema- 
toxylin stained. 
Fig. &--An 
autoradiograph of knee joint of a 4-month-old mouse killed 2 months 
following gold thiomalate administration. Gold accumulation appears well within 
the bone trabeculae. Compare with figure 5. The accumulation of gold is also 
clearly demonstrated in lining cells of the synovial membrane. This section was 
not decalcified. Hematoxylin stained. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
IN SKELETAL TISSUES AND SYNOVIA OF MICE 
7 
animals and by the characteristic energy of the AulQ8 identified by 7-spec- 
trometry. 
The presence of gold in the marrow might be ascribed to the particular 
affinity of reticuloendothelial cells for gold storage after injection of both its 
colloidal form and soluble salts. High gold retention in the liver and spleen 
after gold thioglucose injection has been well documented.6 In autoradiographs, 
the gold is clearly localized in the Kupffer cells. Cells in the fat pads and, 
to a lesser extent, surface lining cells of the synovium are known to have some 
phagocytic capacity.7Ss However, osteoblasts have not been noted previously 
to function as phagocytes or storage cells. 
The difference in distribution of the gold in bones at 1 and 2 months after 
injection may be accounted for by intervening bone growth. Gold originally 
deposited on the surface of the shaft may be expected to appear as bands 
parallel to the surface wherever appositional bone growth intervened, similar 
to the lines of radioactivity demonstrated at various intervals after injection 
of labeled precursors of bone matrix.g-" The same considerations apply to the 
ossification centers of the epiphysis. In the metaphysis, deposits of gold may 
be expected to move toward the shaft as the bone grows longitudinally, thus 
accounting for maximal deposition some distance from the epiphyseal plate. 
The continuous presence of gold in the osteogenic layer of the perichondrial 
zone may be explained by the peculiarities of bone growth, since in this 
area metaphyseal trabeculae contribute both to longitudinal and circumfer- 
ential growth, while the periosteum expands to accommodate an increasing 
bone circumference. Finally, the minor differences in the exact localization 
of gold in the metaphysis and epiphysis, between mice killed 1 and 2 months 
after injection, appear compatible with additional bone growth in the older 
mice. It is realized that these comparisons are only semiquantitative. Rigid 
comparison is impossible on the present material for several reasons: The 
mice allowed to survive for 1 and 2 months were injected at 1 and 2 months of 
age respectively-that 
is, their growth rates probably differed at the time 
of injection. The measurements of growth vs. the continuous rebuilding of 
bone cannot be judged. 
The tentative explanations just presented leave a number of questions 
unanswered. Do the osteogenic cells, like those of the RE system, have a 
specific affinity for gold? Is the gold deposited directly in the bone matrix or 
does it reach bone only via the osteogenic cells, or, conversely, may gold orig- 
inally deposited in bone matrix subsequently accumulate in the osteogenic 
cells and also reach the RE cells of the marrow only secondarily? The last 
possibility is suggested by the distribution of gold-laden macrophages in the 
marrow where they are restricted largely to the metaphyseal region and the 
epiphysis. If gold had reached the reticuloendothelial cells of the marrow 
directly, a more uniform distribution throughout the marrow of the shaft 
would be expected. A delayed uptake by macrophages would also be in ac- 
cord with the observation that concentration of gold in the liver and spleen 
of mice injected with gold thioglucose continues to increase for at least 48 
hours? Preliminary experiments in mice killed 1 and 2 days after gold thio- 
glucose injection also appear to support this notion, since at those early inter- 

=== PAGE 8 ===
8 
TONNA, BRECHER, CRONKITE AND SCHWARTZ 
Figs. 7 (above) and 8 (below) 
Fig. 7.-An 
autoradiograph of a knee joint of a 2-month-old mouse killed 1 month 
following gold thiomalate administration. Large amounts of gold are shown in 
cells of the synovial membranes and histiocytes distributed throughout the adipose 
tissue. The tissue section was decalcified on a glass slide after neutron activation. 
Hematoxylin stained. 
Fig. 8.-An 
autoradiograph of neutron activated adipose tissue of a 2 month-old 
mouse killed 1 month following gold thiomalate administration. Histiocytes show 
a heavy uptake of gold. 5s-xtoxylin stained. 

=== PAGE 9 ===
AU1’* IN SKELETAL TISSUES AND SYNOVIA OF MICE 
9 
vals radioactivity appeared diffusely distributed in the trabeculae with few 
hot spots. Similar initial diffuse labeling of bone which disappeared within 
4 days was described by Leblond et al.9 following injection of S35-sulfate, 
though growth bands persisted as in the present observations. Work now in 
progress is directed to elucidate in greater detail the genesis of the exact 
localization of gold in joints. 
The basic question-whether 
the specific distribution of gold in the various 
structures of joints may help to explain its therapeutic effect-must 
await 
experiments on arthritic animals. The present experiments demonstrate that 
the technic of neutron activation and autoradiography is eminently suited to 
pursue the problem. 
SUMMARY 
The exact localization of gold in various structures of the knee joint of 
mice was determined by a recently developed technic combining neutron 
activation with autoradiography of tissues. Data were presented on mice in- 
jected with gold thioglucose or thiomalate at 1 or 2 months of age and killed 
after intervals of 1 or 2 months. Localization of the gold following injection 
of either compound was restricted to the surface of the synovium, the osteo- 
genic layer of the perichondrial periosteum, reticuloendothelial cells of the 
marrow, and osteogenic cells along the surface of metaphyseal trabeculae 
and epiphyseal centers of ossification. Gold, presumed to have been deposited 
along bone surfaces in the shaft and epiphyses, was present within bone some 
distance parallel to the surfaces, presumably due to intervening appositional 
bone growth. Gold was not observed in cartilage. Possible explanations for 
the lccalization of gold within the joints were discussed. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to acknowledge the excellent assistance of Dr. A. F. Dehons, Mrs. D. 
Tenzer, Mrs. K. Conkling, and Mr. T. Weldon; also, Mr. R. F. Smith for the photo- 
micrography. 
REFERENCES 
1. Research Subcommittee of the Empire 
Rheumatism Council: Gold therapy 
in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. Rheu- 
mat. Dis. 19:95, 1960. 
2. Block, W. D., Buchanan, 0. H., and 
Freyherg, R. H.: Metabolism, toxicity, 
and manner of action of gold com- 
pounds in the treatment of arthritis. 
V. A comparative study of the rate 
of absorption, the retention and the 
rate of excretion of gold administered 
in different compounds. J. Pharmacol. 
& Exper. Therap. 82:391, 1944. 
3. Bertrand, F. F., Waine, H., and Tobias, 
C. A.: Distribution of gold in animal 
body in relation to arthritis. J. Lab. 
& Clin. Med. 33:1133, 1948. 
4. Michelazzi, A. M.: Cure auriche a 
presenca dell’ or0 nell sinoviali artic- 
olari. Gior. clin. med. 15:749, 1943. 
5. Debons, A. F., Silver, L., Cronkite, E. 
P., Johnson, H. A., Brecher, G., 
Tenzer, D., and Schwartz, I. L.: Lo- 
calization of gold in mouse brain in 
relation to gold thioglncose obesity. 
Am. J. Physiol. 202:743, 1962. 
6. Swartz, H. A., Christian, J. E., and 
Andrews, F. N.: Distribution of 
sulfate-35 and gold-198 labeled gold 
thioglucose in mice. Am. J. Physiol. 
199:67, 1960. 
7. Bauer, W., Ropes, M. W., and Waine, 

=== PAGE 10 ===
10 
TONNA, BRECHER, CRONKITE AND SCHWARlZ 
H.: Physiology of articular structures. 
Physiol. Rev. 20:272, 1940. 
8. Lang, J.: Vitalfiirbung der Gelenkin- 
nenhaut. Zeit. mikr. anat. Forsch. 60: 
255, 1954. 
9. Leblond, C. P., Bdanger, L. F., and 
Greulich, R. C.: Formation of bones 
and teeth as visualized by radio- 
autography. Ann. New York Acad. 
Sc. 60:631, 1955. 
10. Carneiro, J., and Leblond, C. P.: Role 
of osteoblasts and odontoblasts in 
secreting the collagen of bone and 
dentin as shown by radioautography 
in mice given tritium-labeled gly- 
cine. Exper. Cell. Res. 18:791, 1959. 
11. Tonna, E. A., and Cronkite, E. P.: A 
quantitative autoradiographic anal- 
ysis of H3-glycine utilization and 
distribution in the femora of mice. 
To be published. 
Edgar A. T m m , Ph.D., Associate Scientist, Div&ion 
of Ex- 
perimental Pathology, Medical Research Center, Brookhaven 
National Laboratofy, Upton, N. Y.; Assodate Professor of 
Biology, Long Island Uniumsity, Graduate School of Arts 
and Sdences, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
George Brecher, M.D., Chief, Section om Hematology, Clinical 
Pathology 
Department, National 
Institutes of 
Health, 
Bethesdu, Md. 
Eugene P. Cronkite, M.D., D.Sc.Hon., Head, DiuMon of Ex- 
perimental Pathology, Medical Research Center, Brookhaven 
National Laboratory, Upton, N . Y. 
Idng L. Schmrtz, M.D., Professor and Chaimnan, Depart- 
mmt of Physiology, University of Cineinnuti, College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio. 
