=== PAGE 1 ===
Calcif Tissue Int (1985) 37:677-683 
Calcified Tissue 
International 
9 1985 by Springer-Verlag 
Changes in Young Rat Radius Following Excision of the Perichondrial Ring 
Jos6 I. Rodrfguez, 1 Emilio Delgado, 2 and Ricardo Paniagua 3 
Departments of JPathology and 2Orthopaedic Surgery, la Paz Hospital, Madrid; and 3Department of Cytology and Histology, 
University of Salamanca, Spain 
Summary. The distal growth plate of the radius was 
exposed in young rats and the perichondrial ring 
and fibrous covers were removed at the exposed 
surface. In addition, a small portion of either the 
adjacent epiphysis or of the adjacent metaphysis 
was removed also. In the following days, important 
alterations in bone structure were observed at the 
level of the removed perichondrial ring. The most 
relevant changes were an enlargement of the growth 
plate at the exposed surface that grew in an ab- 
normal direction, proliferation of bone trabecules at 
the level of the excised perichondrial ring, and 
bending of the bone. No regeneration of the peri- 
chondrial ring occurred. These changes support 
both the role of the perichondrial ring in the me- 
chanical constraint of the growth plate, and the in- 
duction of bone formation by the hypertrophic car- 
tilage at the level of the absent perichondrial ring. 
Key words: Perichondrial ring -- Growth plate -- 
Radius -- Metaphysis -- Cartilage. 
The perichondrial ring of Ranvier is a circumfer- 
ential groove at the periphery of the epiphyseal car- 
tilage, showing a characteristic distribution into 
three cell groups [1-3]: (a) a group of densely 
packed cells in the deepest part of the groove, ap- 
posed to the periosteal mineralized ring [4] or bone 
bark [3], which is the cuff of the groove surrounding 
the epiphyseal plate; (b) a group of more widely 
dispersed, relatively undifferentiated mesenchymal 
cells at the top of the groove; and (c) fibroblasts 
between sheets of highly oriented and organized 
collagen fibers forming a fibrous connective tissue 
roof which is continuous with the outer fibrous 
Send reprint requests to Dr. Jos6 I. Rodrfguez, Departamento 
de Anatomfa Patol6gica, Ciudad Sanitaria La Paz, Paseo de la 
Castellana 261, 28046-Madrid, Spain. 
layer of the periosteum of the diaphysis and me- 
taphysis, as well as with the perichondrium of the 
epiphysis (Fig. 1A). The densely packed cells have 
been considered the progenitor cells for the osteo- 
blasts that form the bone bark, whereas some of the 
undifferentiated mesenchymal cells would be chon- 
droblast precursors that probably contribute to ap- 
positional chondrogenesis and growth in width of 
the epiphyseal cartilage [3]. It has been suggested 
that the role of the bone bark is the retention and 
support of the provisional calcification zone of me- 
taphyseal trabecules [4]. 
In order to explain the pathogenesis of osteo- 
chondroma, Keith [5] suggested that the absence of 
the perichondrial ring would permit the epiphyseal 
cartilage to expand in an abnormal direction. In the 
literature, there is only a short reference to the ef- 
fects of the excision of the perichondrial ring in 
bone structure [6]. This experiment failed to induce 
significant changes in the bone, and a new peri- 
chondrial ring appeared within a few days. How- 
ever, this study was never published and no data 
demonstrating such an assertion are available. We 
have found that removal of the perichondrial ring 
(with partial affectation of the adjacent epiphysis of 
metaphysis) in young rat radii does not produce any 
osteochondroma but does produce changes in bone 
structure at the level of the perichondrial ring. 
These changes support the role of the perichondrial 
ring in the mechanical constraint of the growth plate 
as well as the induction of bone formation by the 
hypertrophic cartilage at the level of the absent per- 
ichondrial ring. The results concerning osteochon- 
droma formation will be presented elsewhere. 
Materials and Methods 
Fifty-six 10-day-old Wistar rats were anesthesized with ether, 
After shaving the skin a longitudinal incision was performed 

=== PAGE 2 ===
678 J.I. Rodrfguez et al.: Excision of the Perichondrial Ring 
EXCISION ZOI~ OF 
1A 
~TK)N 
EPIR4YSEAL 
PLATE 
Fig. 1. A,B. Structure of the perichondrial ring in normal (control) young rat radius, a) Packed cells; b) dispersed cells; c) bone bark, 
B. Masson trichrome, x 125. 
along the distal part of both forelimbs. By means of blunt dis- 
section using wet gauze and without injuring the main vessels, 
the distal growth plate of the radius was exposed. The parts that 
were free of tendons were used for this study. In 28 rats, the 
perichondrial ring of the epiphyseal growth plate, plus its sur- 
rounding fibrous covers, were removed at the exposed surface 
using a stereoscopic lens. In the remaining 28 rats (controls), the 
perichondrial ring and its covers were not removed. 
The results were evaluated on the 3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th, 1 lth, 13th, 
15th, 17th, 19th, 21st, 23rd, 35th, 42nd, and 70th days after sur- 
gery, sacrificing two operated rats and two control rats each day. 
For macroscopic evaluation, a stereomicroscope (Op. Mi. 
Zeiss) was used. A radiologic study was performed in an X-ray 
system (43805N, Faxitron series, Hewlett-Packard) using radio- 
graphic films for mammography (Mammoray RP3, Agfa-Ge- 
vaert). For microscopic study, longitudinal sections of radii were 
performed in a 10% formalin solution, decalcified in a 7% nitric 
acid solution, and embedded in paraffin. Five ~xm-thick sections 
were stained with hematoxylin-eosin and Masson trichrome. 
Results 
No macroscopic, radiologic, or microscopic alter- 
ations were found in control radii. The growth plate 
and perichondrial ring exhibited the normal appear- 
ance (Fig. 1B). The changes observed in the oper- 
ated radii were the following. 
Macroscopic Observations 
Examination of the 56 operated radii revealed that 
the perichondrial ring and its fibrous covers had 
been removed completely at the exposed surface. 
However, due to difficulties arising in the macro- 
scopic delimitation of the perichondrial ring, either 
(a) a small epiphyseal portion adjacent to the distal 
edge of the perichondrial ring (32 radii), or (b) a 
small metaphyseal portion adjacent to the proximal 
edge of the perichondrial ring (24 radii) had also 
been removed along with the perichondrial ring. 
In all the operated radii, during the first week, 
the lesion appeared as a furrow on the growth plate 
cartilage at the external edge (Fig. 2A). During the 
2rid week, the depressed zone had refilled itself pro- 
gressively, beginning at its borders. From the 3rd 
week onward, instead of the depressed zone, there 

=== PAGE 3 ===
J. I. Rodrfguez et al.: Excision of the Perichondrial Ring 679 
Fig. 2. Sequence of macroscopic changes in the distal end of the rat radius after excision of the perichondrial ring and a portion of the 
adjacent epiphysis (A,B,C) or metaphysis (D). A: Furrow (star) in the external edge of the growth plate. 3 days after surgery. B. After 
15 days, the furrow (star) was completely refilled. On the external edge of the epiphysis, a slight remodeling defect (arrow) is observed. 
C. Bending of the radius along the lesioned side 35 days after surgery D. Excrecence on the metaphyseal edge of the removed zone 
(asterisk). 9 days after surgery. 
Fig. 3. Radiographic changes observed in the distal end of the radius. A. 11 days after excision of the perichondrial ring and part of 
the adjacent epiphysis, and osseous bridge (arrow) beginning from the epiphysis, covers the growth plate. B. 5 days after excision of 
the perichondrial ring and part of the adjacent metaphysis, a defect in the external cortex on the metaphysis (arrow) is observed. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
680 J.I. Rodrfguez et al.: Excision of the Perichondrial Ring 
was a slightly protruding mass (Fig. 2B). From the 
4th week on, the bone began to bend on the lesioned 
side (Fig. 2C). 
Only when the metaphysis had been affected par- 
tially, a small protrusion appeared at the external 
metaphyseal edge of the growth plate in the first 
days (Fig. 2D), but this protrusion disappeared after 
the beginning of the 2nd week. 
Radiographic Observations 
When the epiphysis had been affected only par- 
tially, the external edge of the growth plate showed 
alterations in the first week. During the 2nd and 3rd 
weeks, an osseous prolongation grew from the 
epiphyseal ossification center towards the metaph- 
ysis at the external surface (Fig. 3A). From the 4th 
week onward, an osseous bridge between the epiph- 
ysis and metaphysis had been established. 
When the metaphysis had been partially affected, 
defects in the external cortex of the metaphysis 
were observed in the first week (Fig. 3B). During 
the 2nd and 3rd weeks, the external cortex ap- 
peared thickened and showed spiculations at its ex- 
ternal surface. 
Bending of the radius at the injured site was al- 
ways observed. 
Light Microscopy 
Excision of the Perichondrial Ring and Part of the 
Adjacent Epiphysis. Histological sections of these 
radii showed that the perichondrial ring, including 
its metaphyseal portion (bone bark), was absent at 
the exposed surface. In addition, a portion of the 
epiphyseal cartilage that covered the bone epiph- 
ysis was absent (Fig. 4A). From the 9th day the 
excised zone was covered by fibrous connective 
tissue that had developed osseous trabecules from 
the epiphyseal ossification center. The growth plate 
external edge appeared enlarged toward the me- 
taphysis (Fig. 4B). Between the 15th and 17th days, 
the external edge of the growth plate appeared com- 
pletely covered by bone that was in continuity with 
both epiphyseal and metaphyseal bone, as well as 
being covered by fibrous connective tissue (Figs. 
4C and D). No true perichondrial ring was observed 
at this level. The growth plate maintained the 
normal morphology, except for its edge devoid of 
perichondrial ring. At this place a thin rim of car- 
tilage, mainly hypertrophic cartilage cells, had not 
been replaced by bone and persisted at the metaph- 
yseal edge below the proliferating trabecular bone 
(Figs. 4C and D). At approximately the end of the 
3rd week, a bone bridge joined the epiphysis and 
the metaphysis, covering the growth plate external 
edge which remained prolonged along the external 
surface (Fig. 4E). This appearance persisted even 
at the end of the experiment, l0 weeks after sur- 
gery. At this time, no regeneration of the perichon- 
drial ring was observed. These changes were ob- 
served in all the radii studied. 
Excision of the Perichondrial Ring and Part of the 
Adjacent Metaphysis. Light microscopy revealed 
the absence of the perichondrial ring including its 
metaphyseal portion (bone bark) at the external sur- 
face. In addition, the external edge of the adjacent 
metaphysis was absent. A partial fracture in the 
union of the metaphysis and the growth plate hy- 
pertrophic cartilage was observed. The evolution of 
this fracture was similar to that of a normal partial 
fracture of the metaphysis. In the first week, the 
removed zone was covered by a granulation tissue 
extending from the epiphysis to the diaphysis of the 
external edge of the radius. The growth plate 
showed a marked lengthening of the hypertrophic 
cartilage (Fig. 5A). Numerous osteoclasts were 
present on the necrotic osseous trabecules. During 
the 2nd and 3rd weeks, the granulation tissue was 
progressively replaced by a fracture callus con- 
taining nests of both cartilage and bone (Fig. 5B). 
The callus extended from the diaphysis to the 
growth plate. This decreased in length, except for 
its external edge which protruded at the injured side 
and formed an arc that was not covered by a true 
perichondrial ring, but by fibrous connective tissue 
(Fig. 5C). In the later evolution, the external diaph- 
yseal edge appeared thickened, but no epiphyseal- 
metaphyseal osseous bridge was formed. These 
changes were observed in all the radii studied. 
Discussion 
Rang [6] reported that the perichondrial ring regen- 
erated after its removal and that no changes in bone 
structure occurred. We did not find this regenera- 
tion, but we did find pronounced modifications in 
the injured bone when the perichondrial ring was 
removed. Some of these modifications may be at- 
tributed to the injury, but others seem to be a spe- 
cific consequence of perichondrial ring excision. 
The formation of an epiphyseal-metaphyseal os- 
seous bridge occured only when the epiphysis was 
lesioned. This may be related to the injury of the 
epiphyseal cartilage and formation of osseous tra- 
becules from the epiphyseal ossification center, 
which remains exposed. The development of an os- 
seous bridge was also observed by Trueta and Trias 
[7] in the development of the humerus varus. These 
authors' report of an obliteration of the growth 

=== PAGE 5 ===
J. I. Rodrfguez et al.: Excision of the Perichondrial Ring 681 
Fig. 4. Sequence of microscopic changes in the distal end of the rat radius after excision of the perichondrial ring and part of the 
adjacent epiphysis. A. Absence of perichondrial ring (small arrow), including its metaphyseal portion (bone bark), and of the external 
epiphyseal cartilage (large arrow). Compare the excised external edge with the opposite, nonexcised internal edge. 3 days after surgery. 
B: The furrow is covered by fibrous connective tissue (star) containing osseous trabecules (asterisk) in continuity with the epiphyseal 
bone. The external edge of the growth plate (arrow) is enlarged towards the metaphysis. 13 days. C and D: The external edge of the 
growth plate (arrow) is covered by bone (asterisk) which, in turn, is covered by fibrous connective tissue (star). The growth plate 
external edge consists mainly of a rim of hypertrophic cartilage cells (arrow) and is not covered by perichondrial ring. D is a higher 
magnification of an area similar to rectangle in C. 17 days. E: An asseous bridge (asterisk) covered by fibrous connective tissue (star), 
joints the epiphysis and metaphysis. 23 days. Masson trichrome. A,B,C and E x 24; D x 250. 

=== PAGE 6 ===
682 J.I. Rodrlguez et al.: Excision of the Perichondrial Ring 
Fig. 5. Sequence of microscopic changes in 
the distal end of the rat radius after excision 
of the perichondrial ring and part of the 
adjacent metaphysis. A: Fracture in the 
epiphysis-metaphysis union. The growth plate 
appears lengthened (star). 5 days after 
surgery. B: Fracture callus containing cartilage 
(star) and osseous trabecules (asterisk) are 
formed. The growth plate has reduced in 
length except for its external edge devoid of 
perichondrial ring (arrow). 21 days C: The 
enlarged external edge of the perichondrial 
ring protrudes forming an arc (arrow). 23 
days. Masson trichrome. A x 125; B and C 
x 24. 
plate--not confirmed in our experiments--might 
be attributed to the different method used. Whereas 
Trueta and Trias [7] removed a great portion of the 
growth plate, we have caused only minimal lesion 
in the growth plate cartilage. 
The formation of a fracture callus only occurred 
when the metaphysis was injured, and this is related 
to the microfracture of the metaphyseal bone. How- 
ever, in both conditions (epiphyseal or metaphyseal 
injury) there was a lengthening of the hypertrophic 
cartilage at the external edge of the growth plate, 
subjacent to the removed perichondrial ring. This 
feature seems to be a specific response of the 
growth plate to the excision of the perichondrial 
ring. When the perichondrial ring was removed 
without injury the epiphysis the lengthened hyper- 

=== PAGE 7 ===
J. I. Rodrfguez et al.: Excision of the Perichondrial Ring 683 
trophic cartilage protruded forming an arc. This 
agrees with Santoro and Cuzzocrea's [8] observa- 
tions, and with the pathological changes reported 
by Rodrfguez et al. [9] in type II osteogenesis im- 
perfecta, and provides support for the hypothesis 
of the perichondrial ring's primary role in the me- 
chanical constraint of the growth plate [3,6,10]. The 
absence of such a cartilaginous protrusion when the 
epiphysis is partially injured might be due to the 
development of an osseous bridge from the epiph- 
ysis, which would constraint the growth plate and 
impede the protrusion of cartilage. 
The presence of the lengthened hypertrophic car- 
tilage at the level of the removed perichondrial ring 
in all the operated radii suggests that the hyper- 
trophic cartilage cells that are not covered by the 
perichondrial ring induce the formation of osseous 
trabecules at their external surface. This is in 
keeping with Lacroix's [1] observations about the 
formation of bone on growth plates which were de- 
void of perichondrial ring and had been trans- 
planted to the renal capsule. The origin of bone bark 
at the metaphyseal edge of the perichondrial ring is 
still subject to discussion, but it is possible that the 
hypertrophic cartilage of the growth plate may in- 
duce bone bark formation. When the perichondrial 
ring--including the osteoprogenitor cells contained 
in it--is removed, instead of a true bone bark, os- 
seous trabecule proliferation occurs. The origin of 
these trabecules may be osteoprogenitor cells that 
accompany the fibrous connective tissue covering 
the lesioned side. 
References 
1. Lacroix P (1947) Organizers and the growth of bone. J Bone 
Jt Surg 29:292-296 
2. Ranvier L (1873) Quelques faites relatifs au d6veloppment 
du tissu osseaux. Comptes Rendues Acad Sci (Paris) 
77:1105-1109 
3. Shapiro F, Holtrop ME, Glimcher MJ (1977) Organization 
and cellular biology of the perichondrial ossification groove 
of Ranvier. A morphological study in rabbits. J Bone Jt Surg 
A 59:703-723 
4. Balmain N, Moscofian A, Cuisinier-Gleizes P (1983) The 
mineralized ring, a single structure peculiar to long bone 
growth. Calcif Tissue Int 35:232-236 
5. Keith A (1919-1920) Studies on the anatomical changes 
which accompany certain growth disorders of the human 
body. J Anat 54:101-115 
6. Rang M (1969) The growth plate and its disorders. The Wil- 
liams and Wilkins Co, Baltimore 
7. Trueta J, Trias A (1957) La etiologfa y patogenia del hOmero 
varo. Rev Ortop Traumatol 1:107-116 
8. Santoro G, Cuzzocrea D (1963) Richerche sperimentali sulla 
soppresione del circolo metafisario della cartilagine di ac- 
crescimento. Acta Ortop Ital 9:41-57 
9. Rodriguez JI, Perera A, Regadera J, Collado F, Contreras 
F (1982)Osteog6nesis imperfecta. I] Estudio anatomopato- 
16gico (6ptico y ultraestructural) de 8 casos autopsiados. An 
esp Pediatr 17:18-33 
10. Rigal WM (1961) Proceedings and reports of universities. J 
Bone Jt Surg B 43:180-195 
