Catch-Up Growth after Hypothyroidism Is Caused by
Delayed Growth Plate Senescence
Rose Marino, Anita Hegde, Kevin M. Barnes, Lenneke Schrier, Joyce A. Emons, Ola Nilsson,* and
Jeffrey Baron*
Developmental Endocrinology Branch (R.M., A.H., K.M.B., L.S., J.A.E., O.N., J.B.), National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892; Pediatric Endocrinology Unit (R.M.), The
Massachusetts General Hospital for Children, Boston, Boston, Massachusetts 02114; Department of Pediatrics (J.A.E.),
Leiden University Medical Center, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands; Center for Molecular Medicine and Pediatric
Endocrinology Unit (O.N.), Department of Woman and Child Health, Karolinska Institutet and Karolinska University
Hospital, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden
Catch-up growth is defined as a linear growth rate greater
than expected for age after a period of growth inhibition. We
hypothesized that catch-up growth occurs because growth-
inhibiting conditions conserve the limited proliferative ca-
pacity of growth plate chondrocytes, thus slowing the normal
process of growth plate senescence. When the growth-inhib-
iting condition resolves, the growth plates are less senescent
and therefore grow more rapidly than normal for age. To test
this hypothesis, we administered propylthiouracil to new-
born rats for 8 wk to induce hypothyroidism and then stopped
the propylthiouracil to allow catch-up growth. In untreated
controls, the growth plates underwent progressive, senescent
changes in multiple functional and structural characteristics.
We also identified genes that showed large changes in mRNA
expression in growth plate and used these changes as molec-
ular markers of senescence. In treated animals, after stopping
propylthiouracil, these functional, structural, and molecular
senescent changes were delayed, compared with controls.
This delayed senescence included a delayed decline in longi-
tudinal growth rate, resulting in catch-up growth. The find-
ings demonstrate that growth inhibition due to hypothyroid-
ism slows the developmental program of growth plate
senescence, including the normal decline in the rate of lon-
gitudinal bone growth, thus accounting for catch-up growth.
(Endocrinology 149: 1820 –1828, 2008)
I
N HUMANS AND OTHER mammals, the release from
growth-inhibiting conditions leads to supranormal linear
growth, termed catch-up growth. Catch-up growth has been
observed after transient hypothyroidism, GH deficiency,
glucocorticoid excess, malnutrition, and various systemic
diseases (1). Recent evidence suggests that the mechanism
responsible for catch-up growth resides within the growth
plates, not the central nervous system as previously sup-
posed (2). To explain this observation, we hypothesized that
catch-up growth occurs because growth-inhibiting condi-
tions slow the normal process of growth plate senescence.
Growth plate senescence refers to a developmental pro-
gram that occurs during postnatal life (3). With increasing
age, the growth plate undergoes both functional and struc-
tural changes; there is a decline in growth rate, chondrocyte
proliferation rate, column density, and heights of the pro-
liferative and hypertrophic zones (4). Previous studies sug-
gest that growth plate senescence is not a function of time per
se but rather of chondrocyte proliferation (3). Thus, growth
plate chondrocytes may have a limited growth capacity,
which is gradually exhausted, causing growth deceleration
and other senescent changes (3, 5). This program of growth
plate senescence that occurs at the organ level does not nec-
essarily involve the process referred to as cellular senescence
(6). In fact, the limited proliferative capacity of growth plate
chondrocytes that appears to underlie growth plate senes-
cence may not be cell autonomous but instead appears to be
dependent on cell-cell and/or cell-matrix interactions within
the growth plate (7).
We hypothesized that catch-up growth occurs because
growth-inhibiting conditions slow growth plate chondrocyte
proliferation, thus conserving the proliferative capacity of
the chondrocytes and consequently slowing senescence.
Thus, after a growth-inhibiting condition resolves, the
growth plates are less senescent than normal and conse-
quently grow more rapidly than normal, resulting in
catch-up growth (3, 5, 8). Limited data in glucocorticoid-
treated rabbits support that hypothesis (8). To test the model
more definitively and determine whether this model may
provide a general explanation for catch-up growth in mam-
mals, we decided to study catch-up in a different species, the
rat, after a different growth-inhibiting condition, hypothy-
roidism. Newborn rats were treated with propylthiouracil
(PTU) for 8 wk to induce hypothyroidism. After the PTU was
discontinued, catch-up growth occurred. During the
catch-up growth, multiple functional, structural, and molec-
ular markers were studied and compared with untreated
controls to determine whether the previous period of hypo-
thyroidism had delayed the programmed senescence of the
growth plate.
To study molecular markers of growth plate senescence,
we identified genes whose mRNA expression in growth plate
First Published Online January 3, 2008
* O.N. and J.B. were senior authors of this work.
Abbreviations: BrdU, 5-Bromo-2/H11032-deoxyuridine; PTU, propylthiouracil.
Endocrinology is published monthly by The Endocrine Society (http://
www.endo-society.org), the foremost professional society serving the
endocrine community.
0013-7227/08/$15.00/0 Endocrinology 149(4):1820 –1828
Printed in U.S.A. Copyright © 2008 by The Endocrine Society
doi: 10.1210/en.2007-0993
1820
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 25 August 2015. at 05:42 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
chondrocytes changes markedly during growth plate senes-
cence. These genes included chondroadherin, osteoprote-
gerin, secreted frizzled-related protein 4, reelin, and nuclear
protein 1. Chondroadherin is a cartilage matrix protein that
binds both collagen type II (9) and chondrocytes, through
/H92512/H92521, integrin (10), suggesting that it regulates chondrocyte
function (9). Osteoprotegerin is a decoy receptor for receptor
activator of nuclear factor- /H9260B ligand and therefore plays a
central role in bone biology. It is reportedly expressed by
growth plate chondrocytes and may negatively regulate car-
tilage resorption by an inhibitory effect on osteoclast recruit-
ment to the growth plate (11). Mice lacking functional os-
teoprotegerin show growth plate abnormalities (12). In
humans, inactivating mutations of the gene encoding osteo-
protegerin result in juvenile Paget’s disease, which is pri-
marily characterized by excessive bone resorption but also
causes short stature (13). Secreted frizzled-related protein 4
inhibits action of the Wnt system (14), which is critical for
normal growth plate function (15, 16). Reelin is an extracel-
lular glycoprotein that plays a critical role in brain develop-
ment (17). It may also have effects outside the central nervous
system (18) but does not have a known role in the growth
plate. Nuclear protein 1 is a nuclear basic helix-loop-helix
protein that promotes proliferation (19) but has no known
function in the growth plate.
Materials and Methods
Animal study design
All animal procedures were approved by the National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development Animal Care and Use Com-
mittee. Animals were housed and cared for in accordance with the
National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals (20).
Female Sprague Dawley rats (Harlan, Indianapolis, IN) were made
hypothyroid by introducing PTU (1 g/liter; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
M O )a t1do fa g e into the drinking water of the mother (21). The
PTU-containing water was changed twice per wk. PTU treatment was
discontinued at 8 wk of age. The PTU-treated animals were weaned from
their mother at 11 wk of age when they were mature enough to support
their own nutritional needs. Untreated animals served as concurrent
controls. To minimize estrogen effects on the growth plate, all rats were
given depot leuprolide acetate (3 mg/kg, sc; Tap Pharmaceuticals, Deer-
field, IL) every 6 wk, starting at 3 wk of age (22). PTU-treated and control
animals were killed at 8, 11, 13, 16, and 21 wk of age (n /H110058 –16/group).
Additional control animals were killed at 3 and 6 wk of age. Twelve and
2 h before all animals were killed, they received 5-bromo-2 /H11032-deoxyuri-
dine (BrdU; 100 /H9262g/g body weight, ip; Sigma-Aldrich).
Weights were measured weekly for all animals. For the cohort of
animals killed at 16 wk of age, tail lengths were measured weekly. At
the time the animals were killed, tibiae were excised and their lengths
measured with digital calipers. For each animal, one proximal tibia was
fixed in 10% phosphate-buffered formalin. From the other proximal
tibia, the medial and lateral cortical bone near the growth plate was
removed by cutting with a scalpel blade. Next, incisions were made in
the cross-sectional plane through the epiphyses and metaphyses, several
millimeters from the growth plate, allowing us to discard much of the
bone proximal and distal to the growth plate. At that point, each prox-
imal tibia was embedded in optimal cutting temperature compound
(Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) and frozen on dry ice. We
did not attempt to remove all the bone that surrounds the growth plate
before freezing. Instead, we removed only enough cortical bone to
permit sectioning. The remaining bone was removed by microdissection
of longitudinal sections (see below). Heart, liver, kidney, and uterus
were weighed at the time the animals were killed. Serum was collected
at the time the animals were killed from 8-wk-old animals for free T 4
measurements and from 11-wk-old animals for free T 4 and IGF-I mea -
surements (Diagnostic Systems Laboratory, Inc., Webster, TX).
Quantitative histology
Formalin-fixed proximal tibiae were decalcified in 10% EDTA, and
embedded in paraffin. Five-micrometer longitudinal sections were
stained with Masson Trichrome and analyzed using a light microscope
with a VIA-100 video measurement system (Boeckeler, Tucson, AZ). The
observer was blinded to the age and treatment group. Measurements
were made as previously described (23) with the following modifica-
tions: the overall growth plate height was measured from the metaph-
yseal margin of the terminal hypertrophic cell lacuna to the epiphyseal
margin of the resting zone. For most time points, this latter margin
represented the edge of the epiphyseal bone. However, for the 8-wk
PTU-treated group, ossification lagged, and thus, the margin was taken
as the point at which epiphyseal hypertrophic chondrocytes were noted.
Resting zone height was measured parallel to the long axis of the bone
from the edge of epiphyseal bone to the first cell of a proliferative
column. This measurement was performed in three areas of the growth
plate and averaged. The number of resting zone chondrocytes was
counted as the number of cells per 0.2-mm growth plate width (mea-
sured perpendicular to the long axis of the bone). Column density was
assessed as the number of hypertrophic columns per 0.5-mm growth
plate width in six areas of the growth plate and averaged.
Cell proliferation
BrdU is incorporated into newly formed DNA and thus labels rep-
licating cells. Immunohistochemical staining for BrdU was performed
using a BrdU detection kit (Zymed, San Francisco, CA) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. The trypsin exposure time (10 – 60 min) and the
3,3/H11032-diaminobenzidine exposure time (40 sec to 4 min) were adjusted to
achieve strong staining in a discrete subset of proliferative chondrocytes
without significant staining in the remaining proliferative chondrocytes
or any hypertrophic chondrocytes. The observer, blinded to the age and
treatment status, assessed the BrdU-labeling index, defined as the num-
ber of positively stained cell nuclei divided by the total number of nuclei,
assessed within complete columns. Twenty columns in the central part
of the growth plate were counted for each animal and the results
averaged.
Growth plate microdissection, RNA isolation, and
quantitative real-time PCR
Longitudinal, frozen sections (60 /H9262m) of proximal tibial growth plates
were thawed and immediately placed in 70% ethanol, fixed in 100%
methanol, stained with eosin, dehydrated in graded alcohol baths, and
microdissected in xylene using an inverted microscope. Proliferative
zone, prehypertrophic area, and the proximal hypertrophic zone were
isolated en bloc using straight razor blades and hypodermic needles.
This area of the growth plate was chosen to avoid bone contamination.
Gene expression changes were only measured up to 11 wk of age due
to the technical difficulty of microdissecting growth plate cartilage in
older animals. RNA was isolated as previously described (24). Quality
of extracted total RNA was confirmed using an Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer
(Agilent, Palo Alto, CA). Each sample was reverse transcribed to cDNA
using random primers (100 ng/sample; Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, CA)
and SuperScript II reverse transcriptase (200 U; Invitrogen) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. Real-time quantitative PCR was per-
formed using an ABI prism 7000 sequence detection system instrument
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and the following commercial
assays containing specific primers and intron-spanning FAM-labeled
TacMan probes (Applied Biosystems): chondroadherin, rn00569771_m1;
osteoprotegerin, rn00563499_m1; secreted frizzled-related protein 4,
rn00585549_m1; reelin, rn00589609_m1; nuclear protein 1, rn00586046_m1.
The relative concentration of each transcript is presented relative to the
average amount found in 3-wk-old control animals and adjusted for the
amount of starting cDNA (using the calibrator gene 18S rRNA) as well as
the efficiency of the PCRs using the formula: relative expressioni /H11005(Ei)/H9004CTi/
(Er)/H9004CTr), where i represents the gene of interest, r represents 18S ribosomal
RNA, E represents efficiency of the PCR, /H9004CT /H11005[(average CT in 3 wk
group)/H11002(CT of sample)], and CT represents the threshold cycle (25). Serial
Marino et al.  Catch-Up Growth and Growth Plate Senescence Endocrinology, April 2008, 149(4):1820 –1828 1821
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 25 August 2015. at 05:42 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
10-fold dilutions of bone cDNA were used to determine the efficiencies of
the PCRs (25). The quantitative PCR was performed with cDNA from six
different animals, and reactions were carried out in triplicate under the
following thermal cycling conditions: 50 C for 2 min and denaturation at
95 C for 10 min, followed by 45 cycles of 15 sec at 95 C and 1 min at 60 C.
Statistical analysis
Data are presented as mean/H11006sem. A two-way ANOVA for the effects
of time and treatment was performed for all growth, histology, and cell
proliferation data. Catch-up growth was considered to be present if there
was a significant time-treatment interaction term during the recovery
period (beginning at 11 wk). A t test was performed at 8 and 16 wk of
age for tail length to assess the effect of PTU and the completeness of
recovery respectively. The t test was performed at 16 wk of age and not
21 wk of age because tail lengths were measured only in the cohort killed
at 16 wk of age. For other growth measurements, the t test was per-
formed at 8 and 21 wk of age. For real-time PCR data, a one-way
ANOVA for the effect of time was performed for the control group, and
a t test was performed at 8 and 11 wk of age to assess the effect of
hypothyroidism and growth inhibition on expression of age-regulated
genes.
Results
PTU treatment induced hypothyroidism and growth failure
Female rats were made hypothyroid by adding PTU into
the drinking water from 1 d of age until 8 wk of age. To try
to minimize estrogen effects on the growth plate, all rats were
given depot leuprolide acetate. As expected, PTU treatment
induced hypothyroidism. At 8 wk of age, free T 4 levels were
approximately 7 times lower in PTU-treated animals, com-
pared with controls (Fig. 1). Once the PTU treatment was
discontinued, the animals gradually recovered. At 11 wk of
age, the free T 4 levels were approximately 3 times lower in
the previously PTU-treated animals, compared with controls
(Fig. 1). Serum IGF-I was also lower in the previously PTU-
treated animals at 11 wk (440 /H1100650 ng/ml), compared with
controls (1370 /H1100690 ng/ml, P /H110210.001). PTU-induced hypo-
thyroidism inhibited growth of body mass; tail length; tibial
length; and heart, liver, and kidney mass ( P /H110210.001, Fig. 2).
Decreased longitudinal bone growth was in part due to a
lower rate of chondrocyte proliferation in the proliferative
zone. At the end of the treatment period (8 wk time point),
the BrdU-labeling index was approximately 2.2 times lower
in the proximal tibial growth plate of PTU-treated animals
(0.071 /H11006.016), compared with controls (0.16 /H11006.014, P /H11021
0.001). Hypothyroidism also affected the structure of the
growth plate. The resting zone of PTU-treated animals was
remarkably wide due to delayed epiphyseal ossification. At
8 wk of age, hypothyroid (PTU treated) animals exhibited a
greater number of resting zone cells ( P /H110210.001) and a larger
resting zone height ( P /H110210.001) but a smaller overall growth
plate height (P /H110050.02) with fewer proliferative chondrocytes
per column compared with control animals ( P /H110210.001; Fig.
3).
Discontinuation of the PTU treatment was followed by
catch-up growth
After the PTU treatment was discontinued, significant
catch-up growth (defined as growth rate greater than con-
trols) occurred in terms of body mass; tail length; tibia length;
and heart, liver, and kidney masses ( P /H110210.001 for each; Fig.
2). At the last measurement, a statistically significant differ-
ence remained between the two groups in body mass, tail
length, tibia length, and heart, liver, and kidney masses ( P /H11021
0.001 for each), indicating that the catch-up growth was in-
complete at that time (Fig. 2). In control animals, mean uter-
ine mass was 0.03 g at 3 wk of age and thereafter fluctuated
between 0.10 and 0.27 g. In PTU-treated animals, uterine
mass fluctuated between 0.08 and 0.20 g.
Catch-up growth after hypothyroidism is associated with a
delay in the normal structural and functional senescent
changes in the growth plate
In the proximal tibial growth plates of untreated control
animals, we observed significant age-dependent declines,
from 3 to 21 wk of age, in growth plate height, resting zone
height, number of resting zone chondrocytes, number of
proliferative and hypertrophic chondrocytes per column, ter-
minal hypertrophic cell height, column density, and chon-
drocyte proliferation rate ( P /H110210.001 for each, Figs. 3 and 4).
In animals that had previously been hypothyroid, this age-
dependent decline was significantly delayed for all of these
measures of growth plate senescence (Figs. 3 and 4). Thus,
beginning at 11 wk of age, in the animals that had previously
received PTU, there was increased growth plate height, rest-
ing zone height, number of resting zone chondrocytes, num-
ber of proliferative and hypertrophic chondrocytes per col-
umn, terminal hypertrophic cell height, column density, and
proliferation, compared with control animals ( P /H110210.001,
Figs. 3 and 4), such that the curve for the previously hypo-
thyroid animals appeared to be time shifted by approxi-
mately 5 wk, compared with the control animals. Similarly,
there was a time shift of approximately 5 wk in the rate of
longitudinal bone growth as assessed by tibial length and tail
length (Fig. 5).
Catch-up growth after hypothyroidism is associated with a
delay in age-dependent changes in gene expression
Based on previous screening analyses (microarray and/or
real-time PCR; our unpublished data), we selected for study
genes whose mRNA expression in growth plate chondro-
cytes changes markedly during growth plate senescence. If
these changes in gene expression were part of the develop-
FIG. 1. Serum free T 4 levels (mean /H11006SEM) in rats during and after
PTU treatment. Female rats ( white bars) were made hypothyroid by
adding PTU to the drinking water from birth until 8 wk of age.
Untreated animals served as controls ( black bars). At the end of the
8-wk treatment period, animals that received PTU had lower free T 4
levels. Three weeks after the end of treatment, free T 4 levels had
increased but not normalized.
1822 Endocrinology, April 2008, 149(4):1820 –1828 Marino et al.  Catch-Up Growth and Growth Plate Senescence
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 25 August 2015. at 05:42 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
mental program of growth plate senescence, then one would
expect that hypothyroidism would delay these changes just
as it delayed structural and functional markers of senescence.
To test that prediction, we microdissected proximal tibial
growth plates (including proliferative zone, prehypertrophic
area, and proximal hypertrophic zone) from study animals,
isolated RNA, and quantified specific mRNAs by real-time
PCR. As expected, levels of chondroadherin, osteoprote-
gerin, secreted frizzled-related protein 4, reelin, and nuclear
protein 1 increased with age in growth plates from control
animals ( P /H110210.001, Fig. 6). In 11-wk-old animals that had
previously received PTU, the expression levels were lower
than in control animals (Fig. 6) for chondroadherin (P /H110050.02),
osteoprotegerin (P /H110050.002), secreted frizzled-related protein
4( P /H110050.02), reelin (P /H11005NS), and nuclear protein 1 (P /H110050.03).
These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that these
changes in gene expression are part of the senescence
program and therefore the increase in expression that oc-
curred with age in control animals was delayed by pre-
vious growth inhibition in PTU-treated animals. At 8 wk
of age, the mRNA levels might reflect not only this mat-
urational delay but also the effects of concurrent hypo-
thyroidism, and, indeed, the net effect on expression, com-
pared with control animals, was variable (Fig. 6). At 8 wk
of age, hypothyroidism was associated with increased se-
creted frizzled-related protein 4 mRNA levels, compared
FIG. 2. Growth (mean /H11006SEM) in body mass, tail length, tibial length, organ (heart, liver, and kidney) mass, and organ mass relative to body
mass during and after PTU treatment in young rats. Female rats ( open symbols) were made hypothyroid by adding PTU to the drinking water
from birth until 8 wk of age. Untreated animals served as controls (closed symbols). All rats received depot leuprolide acetate every 6 wk, starting
at 3 wk of age. During the PTU treatment period ( solid boxes, pertains to all graphs), growth was inhibited in treated animals ( P /H110210.001 for
body mass, tail length, tibial length, organ masses). Afterward, catch-up growth occurred in all of those measures (defined as growth rate greater
than controls, P /H110210.001), although the catch-up was not complete at the time of the final measurement ( P /H110210.001).
Marino et al.  Catch-Up Growth and Growth Plate Senescence Endocrinology, April 2008, 149(4):1820 –1828 1823
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 25 August 2015. at 05:42 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
with controls ( P /H110050.01). Chondroadherin, osteoprote-
gerin, reelin, and nuclear protein 1 mRNA levels did not
differ significantly from controls.
Discussion
In young rats, treatment with PTU caused hypothyroidism
and inhibited growth. After release from hypothyroidism,
catch-up growth was seen in body mass, tail length, tibial
length, and heart, liver, and kidney masses. Control animals
showed the normal senescent decline in tibial growth rate,
chondrocyte proliferation rate, growth plate height, resting
zone height, number of resting zone chondrocytes, number
of proliferative zone chondrocytes per column, number of
hypertrophic chondrocytes per column, terminal hypertro-
phic cell height, and column density. The senescent decline
in every one of these variables was delayed in the animals
that had previously been hypothyroid. In control animals,
mRNA levels of chondroadherin, osteoprotegerin, secreted
frizzled-related protein 4, reelin, and nuclear protein 1, in-
creased markedly with age. During catch-up growth, ani-
mals that had previously been hypothyroid expressed chon-
droadherin, osteoprotegerin, secreted frizzled-related
protein 4, and nuclear protein 1 mRNAs at levels similar to
younger control animals. Thus, molecular markers of senes-
cence, like the structural and functional markers of senes-
cence, also appeared to be delayed by the previous
hypothyroidism.
We attempted to minimize confounding factors that might
affect growth. Hypothyroidism might have caused the rat
pups to feed less robustly than normal and delayed weaning,
FIG. 3. Growth plate structure and function during and
after PTU treatment. Female rats were made hypothy-
roid by adding PTU to the drinking water from birth until
8w ko fa g e( open symbols). Untreated animals served as
controls (closed symbols). All rats received depot leupro-
lide acetate every 6 wk, starting at 3 wk of age. The solid
boxes represent time animals received PTU (0 – 8 wk of
age, pertains to all graphs). Thedotted line represents the
transition period immediately after cessation of PTU. In
control animals, all end points declined significantly with
age (P /H110210.001). In animals that had previously received
PTU, this age-dependent decline was significantly de-
layed for all of these end points ( P /H110210.001). Quantitative
histology (mean /H11006SEM) was performed on Masson
Trichrome-stained sections of the proximal tibial growth
plate. An observer blinded to treatment and age mea-
sured growth plate height, resting zone height, number
of resting zone chondrocytes per 0.2 mm growth plate
width, number of proliferative and hypertrophic chon-
drocytes per column, terminal hypertrophic cell height,
column density, and proliferative index in the prolifera-
tive zone. Proliferative index was measured by admin-
istering BrdU to the rats 12 an d 2 h before the animals
were killed and then identifying BrdU-labeled cells by
immunohistochemistry. The proliferative index repre-
sents the number of labeled nuclei divided by total nuclei
in intact chondrocyte columns.
1824 Endocrinology, April 2008, 149(4):1820 –1828 Marino et al.  Catch-Up Growth and Growth Plate Senescence
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 25 August 2015. at 05:42 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
AAA B
C D
E F
B
C D
FE
FIG. 4. Growth plate morphology during hypothyroidism and during catch-up growth. Female rats were made hypothyroid by adding PTU to
the drinking water from birth until 8 wk of age. Untreated animals served as controls. All rats received depot leuprolide acetate every 6 wk,
starting at 3 wk of age. Representative Masson Trichrome-stained sections of proximal tibial growth plates from 8- (A and B), 11- (C and D),
and 13-wk-old (E and F) control (A, C, and E) and PTU-treated (B, D, and F) animals are shown. Hypothyroidism (8-wk time-point) affected
the structure of the growth plate; the resting zone of PTU-treated animals was remarkably wide due to delayed epiphyseal ossification.
PTU-treated animals exhibited a greater number of resting zone cells and a larger resting zone height, but a smaller overall growth plate height
with fewer proliferative chondrocytes per column, compared with control animals. During catch-up growth (11 and 13 wk time point), the growth
plate height, resting zone height, number of resting zone chondrocytes, number of proliferative and hypertrophic chondrocytes per column,
terminal hypertrophic cell height, and column density were greater in animals that had previously received PTU than in controls. Epi, Epiphysis;
RZ, resting zone; PZ, proliferative zone; HZ, hypertrophic zone; Met, metaphysic. Scale bar , 100 /H9262m.
Marino et al.  Catch-Up Growth and Growth Plate Senescence Endocrinology, April 2008, 149(4):1820 –1828 1825
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 25 August 2015. at 05:42 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
and thus the growth inhibition may have reflected both the
direct effects of thyroid hormone deficiency and the indirect
effects of malnutrition. To minimize this indirect effect, we
delayed weaning the relatively immature PTU-treated ani-
mals until 11 wk of age. We also attempted to minimize
estrogen secretion by administering a long-acting GnRH ag-
onist, leuprolide acetate, following a protocol described pre-
viously (22). However, uterine weight (approximately
0.16 g), although less than expected for normal mature rats
(approximately 0.5 g) (26), exceeded that expected for ovari-
ectomized rats (approximately 0.1 g) (26), suggesting incom-
plete suppression of the gonadal axis. If hypothyroidism
altered the pace of sexual maturation, differing estrogen
concentrations might have influenced the experimental
endpoints.
The delay in senescence-related gene expression was as-
sessed at 11 wk of age. Even though catch-up growth was
occurring at this time-point, the thyroid hormone levels were
not fully recovered. Differing levels of thyroid hormones
could have influenced the expression of these senescence
markers. However, some of the observed differences in gene
FIG. 5. Growth rate (mean /H11006SEM) of the tibia and tail length during
and after hypothyroidism. Female rats were made hypothyroid by
adding propylthiouracil to the drinking water from birth until 8 wk
of age ( open symbols ). Untreated animals served as controls ( closed
symbols). All rats received depot leuprolide acetate every 6 wk, start-
ing at 3 wk of age. In control animals, the growth rate underwent the
normal senescent decline beginning at 4 wk. In treated animals,
during the treatment period (solid boxes), growth was inhibited. After
recovery from the treatment, the growth rate was higher than in
controls and then declined. In the animals that had previously been
hypothyroid, the senescent decline in growth rate appears to be time
shifted by approximately 5 wk, compared with control animals.
FIG. 6. Molecular markers of growth plate senescence. Female rats were
made hypothyroid by adding PTU to the drinking water from birth until
8 wk of age. Untreated animals served as controls. All rats received depot
leuprolide acetate every 6 wk, starting at 3 wk of age. The solid boxes
represent time animals received PTU (0 – 8 wk of age, pertains to all
graphs). The relative concentration (mean /H11006SEM) of each mRNA is
presented relative to the average concentration found in 3-wk-old control
animals and adjusted for the amount of starting cDNA (using the cal-
ibrator gene 18S rRNA) as well as the efficiency of the real-time PCR.
The levels of chondroadherin, osteoprotegerin, secreted frizzled-related
protein 4, reelin, and nuclear protein 1 mRNA increased with age in
microdissected growth plates collected from control animals (*, P /H11021
0.001, by ANOVA). At 11 wk of age, the age-dependent rise in mRNA
expression was delayed in the animals that had previously received PTU
(by t test, P values shown at right side of each panel).
1826 Endocrinology, April 2008, 149(4):1820 –1828 Marino et al.  Catch-Up Growth and Growth Plate Senescence
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 25 August 2015. at 05:42 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
expression (for example, chondroadherin and osteoprote-
gerin) at 11 wk had not been present at 8 wk when the
hypothyroidism was more severe, suggesting that the ob-
served differences at 11 wk are not simply due to incomplete
recovery but rather to the prior history of hypothyroidism.
In the animals that had previously been hypothyroid, the
observed delay in multiple functional, structural, and mo-
lecular markers of growth plate senescence strongly supports
the hypothesis that hypothyroidism slows the developmen-
tal program of growth plate senescence. We previously
showed evidence that glucocorticoid excess in the rabbit also
slows growth plate senescence (8). The combined finding,
that growth plate senescence is slowed by two different
growth-inhibiting conditions in two different species, sup-
ports our model that growth plate senescence is not a func-
tion of time per se , but rather of growth, and therefore inhi-
bition of growth also inhibits this developmental process. To
explain this phenomenon at a cellular level, we proposed that
growth plate chondrocytes have a finite proliferative capac-
ity, which is gradually exhausted with age, causing growth
plate senescence (3, 5). The findings in the current study
support this model.
Our findings also strongly support the hypothesis that
catch-up growth is caused by delayed growth plate senes-
cence. In control animals, the rate of longitudinal bone
growth underwent the expected senescent decline with age.
In animals that had previously been hypothyroid, that de-
cline was delayed; the growth rate appeared to be shifted in
time, compared with the control growth rate. The magnitude
of this shift, approximately 5 wk, was similar in magnitude
to the shift in other markers of growth plate senescence.
Thus, in animals that had previously been hypothyroid, the
growth plates resembled normal growth plates of animals 5
wk younger in their structural appearance, function, and
molecular profile. Consequently, the growth rate during
catch-up growth, although elevated for chronological age,
appears to be normal for the degree of growth plate senes-
cence. These findings therefore indicate that catch-up growth
represents growth that is appropriate for a younger, less
senescent growth plate. We had previously shown evidence
that catch-up growth after glucocorticoid excess in the rabbit
also appears to be due to a delayed senescent decline in the
growth rate (8). The combined finding, that catch-up growth
appears to be due to delayed growth plate senescence in two
different species, after two different growth-inhibiting con-
ditions, suggests that delayed senescence provides a general
explanation for catch-growth. In children with celiac disease
placed on a gluten-free diet, the pattern of catch-up growth
is also consistent with the hypothesis of delayed growth plate
senescence (27).
The current study substantiates and extends previous ob-
servations in several important ways. First, in the current
study, we performed a far more complete assessment of the
developmental state of the growth plate by looking at many
more structural and functional markers of senescence than
has been done previously. Second, in the current study, we
combined, for the first time, molecular markers of growth
plate senescence with structural and functional markers. The
observation that these markers all behaved in concert sup-
ports the notion of growth plate senescence as an integrated
developmental program. Third, in the current study, by
choosing to study a different mammalian species and a dif-
ferent growth-inhibiting condition than in previous studies,
we have shown evidence that the previous findings do not
represent specific effects of glucocorticoid treatment in the
rabbit but instead general, fundamental explanations for the
causes of growth plate senescence and catch-up growth.
Our findings in the current study do not completely ex-
clude the possibility that a systemic mechanism could be
responsible for the observed catch-up growth (28). For ex-
ample, an increase in growth hormone and/or IGF-I during
the recovery period might account for the increase in growth
rate, proliferation rate, and chondrocyte column height.
However, at 11 wk of age, the serum IGF-I levels were ac-
tually lower in the rats undergoing catch-up growth than in
controls. Furthermore, increased GH levels would not
readily explain the observation that all variables were af-
fected in a temporal pattern consistent with a time-shift. In
addition, a systemic mechanism alone could not provide a
general explanation for catch-up growth because it cannot
readily explain the phenomenon of local catch-up growth
that occurs in single growth plates after local growth inhi-
bition by glucocorticoid (2). Although delayed growth plate
senescence appears to cause catch-up growth in a variety of
circumstances, other mechanisms, including hormonal
mechanisms, might also contribute in some circumstances.
Indeed, the observed catch-up growth in nonskeletal organs
could be explained by a systemic mechanism. Alternatively,
the observation might indicate that common, local cellular
mechanisms limit growth in multiple tissues, including the
growth plate, and thus, growth-inhibiting conditions may
delay the exhaustion of the growth potential in multiple
organs, resulting in subsequent catch-up growth.
Catch-up growth in tibia length and tail length, although
striking, was incomplete. One possible explanation is that the
rate of growth plate senescence may be determined by pro-
liferation of stem-like cells in the resting zone (5, 29) whereas
the rate of growth is dependent on the proliferation rate of
the nonstem cells in the proliferative zone. If hypothyroidism
slows proliferation in the proliferative zone more than it
slows proliferation in the resting zone, it might have a greater
inhibitory effect on the rate of growth than on the rate of
senescence. In this situation, each cell division of the stem-
like cells would produce a smaller clone of proliferative zone
chondrocytes, resulting in less efficient growth. In this sit-
uation, catch-up growth would be expected to be incomplete.
Another possible explanation is that the number of stem-cell
divisions tends to be similar in various hormonal and nu-
tritional states but is not completely invariant.
mRNA levels for the genes studied were generally lower
in PTU-treated animals than in controls at 11 wk of age
during the recovery period, suggesting that the previous
period of hypothyroidism had delayed the normal rise in
gene expression; however, at 8 wk of age, when the animals
were still receiving PTU, the mRNA levels tended to be
greater in treated animals. However, the 8-wk time point is
difficult to interpret because at this age the treated animals
and controls differ in two ways. In treated animals, mRNA
levels at this time might be affected not only by the preceding
period of growth inhibition caused by hypothyroidism,
Marino et al.  Catch-Up Growth and Growth Plate Senescence Endocrinology, April 2008, 149(4):1820 –1828 1827
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 25 August 2015. at 05:42 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.
which appeared to delay the normal rise in gene expression
but also by the concurrent hypothyroidism. Taken together,
the data at 8 and 11 wk of age suggest that a previous period
of growth inhibition by hypothyroidism delays the rise in
gene expression (as shown at 11 wk of age), but concurrent
hypothyroidism increases expression of these genes. At the
8-wk time point, the stimulatory effect of concurrent hypo-
thyroidism appears to outweigh the delaying effects of pre-
vious growth inhibition. Similar effects are seen for the struc-
tural and functional markers of senescence. For example, the
number of proliferative chondrocytes per column is de-
creased during hypothyroidism, at 8 wk but is increased after
hypothyroidism at 11 wk. The former presumably reflects
primarily the growth-suppressive effects of concurrent hy-
pothyroidism; the latter reflects the delaying effects of pre-
vious hypothyroidism.
In children with hypothyroidism, bone age is markedly
delayed and using the bone age to predict adult height often
overestimates the actual adult height (30). Our findings sug-
gest an explanation for this overestimation. At the end of the
PTU treatment, there was a striking delay in epiphyseal
ossification that appeared to be out of proportion to the delay
in growth plate senescence. Because bone age is based on the
extent of cartilage ossification, the delay in bone age in hy-
pothyroid children may exceed the delay in growth plate
senescence. This divergence of bone age and growth plate
senescence could explain the overoptimistic height predic-
tion reported in hypothyroid children.
We conclude that growth inhibition due to hypothyroid-
ism slows the entire developmental program of growth plate
senescence, including multiple structural, functional, and
molecular changes and that the subsequent catch-up growth
represents the normal growth rate of younger, less senescent,
growth plates. Combined with previous studies, the findings
strongly support the concepts that growth plate senescence
is a function of chondrocyte proliferation and that delayed
growth plate senescence represents a general explanation for
catch-up growth.
Acknowledgments
Received July 19, 2007. Accepted December 27, 2007.
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to: Jeffrey Baron, M.D.,
National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, Building CRC, Room 1-3330, 10 Center Drive MSC 1103, Be-
thesda, Maryland 20892-1103. E-mail: jeffrey.baron@nih.gov.
This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health. O.N. was supported by grants from the Swedish
Research Council (K2007-52X-20316-01-4), the Swedish Society of Med-
ical Research, the Magnus Bergvall Foundation, Sa ¨llskapet Barnavård,
and Stiftelsen Frimurare Barnhuset i Stockholm.
References
1. Boersma B, Wit JM 1997 Catch-up growth. Endocr Rev 18:646 – 661
2. Baron J, Klein KO, Colli MJ, Yanovski JA, Novosad JA, Bacher JD, Cutler
Jr GB 1994 Catch-up growth after glucocorticoid excess: a mechanism intrinsic
to the growth plate. Endocrinology 135:1367–1371
3. Nilsson O, Baron J 2004 Fundamental limits on longitudinal bone growth:
growth plate senescence and epiphyseal fusion. Trends Endocrinol Metab
15:370 –374
4. Walker KV, Kember NF 1972 Cell kinetics of growth cartilage in the rat tibia.
II. Measurements during ageing. Cell Tissue Kinet 5:409 – 419
5. Schrier L, Ferns SP, Barnes KM, Emons JA, Newman EI, Nilsson O, Baron
J 2006 Depletion of resting zone chondrocytes during growth plate senescence.
J Endocrinol 189:27–36
6. Collado M, Blasco MA, Serrano M 2007 Cellular senescence in cancer and
aging. Cell 130:223–233
7. Nilsson O, Mitchum Jr RD, Schrier L, Ferns SP, Barnes KM, Troendle JF,
Baron J 2005 Growth plate senescence is associated with loss of DNA meth-
ylation. J Endocrinol 186:241–249
8. Gafni RI, Weise M, Robrecht DT, Meyers JL, Barnes KM, De Levi S, Baron
J 2001 Catch-up growth is associated with delayed senescence of the growth
plate in rabbits. Pediatr Res 50:618 – 623
9. Mansson B, Wenglen C, Morgelin M, Saxne T, Heinegard D 2001 Association
of chondroadherin with collagen type II. J Biol Chem 276:32883–32888
10. Camper L, Heinegard D, Lundgren-Akerlund E 1997 Integrin /H92512/H92521i sar e -
ceptor for the cartilage matrix protein chondroadherin. J Cell Biol 138:1159 –
1167
11. Kishimoto K, Kitazawa R, Kurosaka M, Maeda S, Kitazawa S 2006 Expres-
sion profile of genes related to osteoclastogenesis in mouse growth plate and
articular cartilage. Histochem Cell Biol 125:593– 602
12. Kawana F, Sasaki T 2003 Osteoclast differentiation and characteristic trabec-
ular bone formation during growth plate destruction in osteoprotegerin-de-
ficient mice. J Electron Microsc (Tokyo) 52:515–525
13. Cundy T, Davidson J, Rutland MD, Stewart C, DePaoli AM 2005 Recom-
binant osteoprotegerin for juvenile Paget’s disease. N Engl J Med 353:918 –923
14. Horvath LG, Lelliott JE, Kench JG, Lee CS, Williams ED, Saunders DN,
Grygiel JJ, Sutherland RL, Henshall SM 2007 Secreted frizzled-related pro-
tein 4 inhibits proliferation and metastatic potential in prostate cancer. Prostate
67:1081–1090
15. Yang Y, Topol L, Lee H, Wu J 2003 Wnt5a and Wnt5b exhibit distinct activities
in coordinating chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation. Development
130:1003–1015
16. Andrade AC, Nilsson O, Barnes KM, Baron J 2007 Wnt gene expression in the
post-natal growth plate: regulation with chondrocyte differentiation. Bone
40:1361–1369
17. Herz J, Chen Y 2006 Reelin, lipoprotein receptors and synaptic plasticity. Nat
Rev Neurosci 7:850 – 859
18. Hong SE, Shugart YY, Huang DT, Shahwan SA, Grant PE, Hourihane JO,
Martin ND, Walsh CA 2000 Autosomal recessive lissencephaly with cerebellar
hypoplasia is associated with human RELN mutations. Nat Genet 26:93–96
19. Mallo GV, Fiedler F, Calvo EL, Ortiz EM, Vasseur S, Keim V, Morisset J,
Iovanna JL 1997 Cloning and expression of the rat p8 cDNA, a new gene
activated in pancreas during the acute phase of pancreatitis, pancreatic de-
velopment, and regeneration, and which promotes cellular growth. J Biol
Chem 272:32360 –32369
20. National Research Council 2003 Guide for the care and use of laboratory
animals. Washington, DC: National Academy Press
21. Meisami E 1984 Complete recovery of growth deficits after reversal of PTU-
induced postnatal hypothyroidism in the female rat: a model for catch-up
growth. Life Sci 34:1487–1496
22. Ogawa Y, Okada H, Heya T, Shimamoto T 1989 Controlled release of LHRH
agonist, leuprolide acetate, from microcapsules: serum drug level profiles and
pharmacological effects in animals. J Pharm Pharmacol 41:439 – 444
23. Weise M, De-Levi S, Barnes KM, Gafni RI, Abad V, Baron J 2001 Effects of
estrogen on growth plate senescence and epiphyseal fusion. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 98:6871– 6876
24. Heinrichs C, Yanovski JA, Roth AH, Yu YM, Domene HM, Yano K, Cutler
Jr GB, Baron J 1994 Dexamethasone increases growth hormone receptor mes-
senger ribonucleic acid levels in liver and growth plate. Endocrinology 135:
1113–1118
25. Pfaffl MW 2001 A new mathematical model for relative quantification in
real-time RT-PCR. Nucleic Acids Res 29:e45
26. Lind PM, Eriksen EF, Lind L, Orberg J, Sahlin L 2004 Estrogen supplemen-
tation modulates effects of the endocrine disrupting pollutant PCB126 in rat
bone and uterus: diverging effects in ovariectomized and intact animals. Tox-
icology 199:129 –136
27. Emons JA, Boersma B, Baron J, Wit JM 2005 Catch-up growth: testing the
hypothesis of delayed growth plate senescence in humans. J Pediatr 147:843–
846
28. Tanner JM 1963 Regulation of growth in size of mammals. Nature 199:845– 850
29. Abad V, Meyers JL, Weise M, Gafni RI, Barnes KM, Nilsson O, Bacher JD,
Baron J 2002 The role of the resting zone in growth plate chondrogenesis.
Endocrinology 143:1851–1857
30. Boersma B, Otten BJ, Stoelinga GB, Wit JM 1996 Catch-up growth after
prolonged hypothyroidism. Eur J Pediatr 155:362–367
Endocrinology is published monthly by The Endocrine Society (http://www.endo-society.org), the foremost professional society serving the
endocrine community.
1828 Endocrinology, April 2008, 149(4):1820 –1828 Marino et al.  Catch-Up Growth and Growth Plate Senescence
The Endocrine Society. Downloaded from press.endocrine.org by [${individualUser.displayName}] on 25 August 2015. at 05:42 For personal use only. No other uses without permission. . All rights reserved.