Original Article
SAG therapy restores bone growth and reduces
enchondroma incidence in a model of skeletal
chondrodysplasias caused by Ihh deﬁciency
Xinhua Li,1,2,3 Shuting Yang,1 Zahra Chinipardaz,1,4 Eiki Koyama,5 and Shuying Yang 1,6,7
1Department of Basic and Translational Sciences, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; 2Department of Orthopedics,
Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200080, China; 3Department of Spinal Surgery, East Hospital, Tongji
University, School of Medicine, Shanghai 200120, China; 4Department of Periodontics, School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA; 5Division of Orthopedic Surgery, Department of Surgery, The Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; 6Center for Innovation &
Precision Dentistry, School of Dental Medicine, School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, University of Pennsylvania, PA 19104, USA; 7The Penn Center for
Musculoskeletal Disorders, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Inactivation mutations in the Indian hedgehog (Ihh) gene in
humans cause numerous skeletal chondrodysplasias, including
acrocapitofemoral dysplasia, brachydactyly type A1, and hu-
man short stature. The lack of an appropriate human-relevant
model to accurately represent these chondrodysplasias has
hampered the identi ﬁcation of clinically effective treatments.
Here, we established a mouse model of human skeletal
dysplasia induced by Ihh gene mutations via ablation of Ihh
in Aggrecan-positive (Acan+) cells using Aggrecan (Acan)-
creERT transgenic mice. Smoothen agonist (SAG) promoted
Hh activity and rescued chondrocyte proliferation and differ-
entiation by stimulating smoothened traf ﬁcking to the cilium
in Ihh-silenced cells. SAG treatment corrected mouse stature
and signi ﬁcantly decreased mortality without evidence of
toxicity. Moreover, Ihh ablation in Acan+ cells produced en-
chondroma-like tissues near the growth plates that were signif-
icantly reduced by SAG treatment. These results demonstrated
that SAG effectively treats skeletal dysplasia caused by Ihh gene
mutations in a mouse model, suggesting that SAG may repre-
sent a potential drug for the treatment of these diseases and/
or enchondromas.
INTRODUCTION
Inactivation mutations in the Indian hedgehog (Ihh) gene in humans
cause numerous skeletal chondrodysplasias, including acrocapitofe-
moral dysplasia,1 brachydactyly type A1,2,3 and human short stature.4
Skeletal chondrodysplasias caused by Ihh gene inactivation mutations
have been reported to be among the most common forms of idio-
pathic short stature and are clinically characterized by variable de-
grees of short stature, short limbs, brachydactyly, and narrow thorax
with pectus deformities. 2– 5 Currently, there is no effective treatment
for these diseases. Although human growth hormone has been used to
treat these diseases, little evidence has con ﬁrmed the effectiveness of
such treatments4,6 due to the lack of an ideal animal model for testing
the efﬁcacy of therapeutic strategies and drugs. Ihh null mice are em-
bryonic lethal at the early developmental stage, when Ihh expression
is normally detected in the visceral endoderm. 7– 10 Therefore, the
development of an animal model to accurately represent Ihh gene
mutation-related dysplasia is essential for drug development and
repurposing.
An elevated level of Hh signaling has been reported to contribute to
various stages of carcinogenesis, including enchondroma and chon-
drosarcoma.11,12 Although preclinical data on the therapeutic role
of Hh antagonists in chondrosarcoma are promising, the clinical
data of a phase II trial in patients have been discouraging.13,14 In addi-
tion, it was recently reported that Hh signaling is downregulated in
several cancers and that its restoration restrains tumor growth. 15
This discrepancy suggests that the relationship between Ihh levels
and enchondroma/chondrosarcoma development is complicated.
Ihh binds to the membrane receptor protein Patched (Ptc) to relieve
the inhibition of the membrane protein smoothened (Smo), which al-
lows Smo to enter the cilium and activate Gli transcription factors,
thus regulating target gene expression. 16– 18 Smoothen agonist
(SAG) is a derivative of chlorobenzothiophene that binds and activates
Smo, thus upregulating the canonical Ihh pathway. Recently, SAG has
been reported to successfully correct structural and cognitive de ﬁcits
in a Down syndrome mouse model and prevent glucocorticoid-
induced neonatal cerebellar injury by activating Hh signaling. 19,20
However, the preclinical therapeutic effect of SAG in animal models
of Ihh gene mutation-related dysplasia has not yet been explored.
Because ablating Ihh in type II collagen-cre (Col2-cre) mice at the em-
bryonic stage causes embryonic lethality, we chose to delete the Ihh
Received 17 March 2021; accepted 24 September 2021;
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2021.09.015.
Correspondence: Shuying Yang, Department of Basic and Translational Science,
School of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 240 South 40th Street, Levy
437, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6030.
E-mail: shuyingy@upenn.edu
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021 ª 2021 461
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
gene at the postnatal stage. 10 It was reported that Aggrecan-creERT
marks the largest number of skeletal stem cells in mice, and we gener-
ated Acan-creERT;Ihhﬂ/ﬂ mice in which Ihh was ablated from Acan+
skeletal stem cells by induction with tamoxifen (TM) in this study. 21
The phenotype of these mice highly resembled that of the human
skeletal dysplasia caused by Ihh mutations. In addition, this mouse
model manifested multiple enchondroma-like lesions around growth
plates. Our results showed for the ﬁrst time that SAG rescues the pro-
liferation and differentiation of Ihh-silenced chondrocytes by stimu-
lating smoothened trafﬁcking onto cilia to restore Hh activity in Ihh-
silenced cells in vitro. SAG also corrects dwar ﬁsm and other Ihh mu-
tation-related phenotypes and reduces enchondroma-like tissue in
Ihh-deﬁcient mice. Our data demonstrated that SAG may represent
a promising treatment modality for the Ihh mutation phenotype
and other disorders related to hypoactivation of Hh signaling.
RESULTS
Acan+ progenitors are major contributors to postnatal skeletal
development
To test the efﬁciency and speciﬁcity of Cre recombination, we crossed
Acan-creERT mice with R26-tdTomato reporter mice, which express
red ﬂuorescence upon cre activation. Acan-creERT;tdTomato mice
were intraperitoneally (i.p.) injected with a single dose of TM
(75 mg/kg) at postnatal day (P) 3 and then harvested at P30. We
found that most of the cells in the articular cartilage ( Figure 1 A),
growth plate, trabecular and cortical bone of the long bone ( Fig-
ure 1B), and vertebral spine and intervertebral disc (IVD) (Figure 1C)
were tdTomato-positive (tdTomato+) at P30. In addition, the major-
ity of cells in the suture of the skull bone also displayed strong
tdTomato+ signaling ( Figure 1D).
To further characterize the function of Acan+ cells in mouse postnatal
skeletal development, mice bearing a diphtheria toxin (DTA) trans-
gene downstream of a ﬂoxed stop codon (DTA ﬂ/ﬂ) were crossed
with Acan-creERT transgenic mice to ablate Acan+ cells. Acan-
creERT littermates served as the control (wild-type group). Specif-
ically, TM was i.p. injected into either Acan-creERT;DTA ﬂ/ﬂ or
Acan-creERT mice at P3. By 1 week following TM injection, all
Acan-creERT;DTAﬂ/ﬂ mice died spontaneously (20/20). Skeletal
X-ray radiographs and alizarin red/Alcian blue staining analysis
showed dwar ﬁsm and skeletal development defect phenotypes in
Acan-creERT;DTAﬂ/ﬂ mice ( Figures 1 E and 1F). Quantity analysis
showed the average body length decreased from 4.9 cm in the
Acan-creERT group to 3.5 cm in the Acan-creERT;DTA ﬂ/ﬂ mice at
P10 (Figure 1G). Thus, these results revealed that Acan+ progenitors
are major contributors to postnatal skeletal development.
Ablation of Ihh in Acan+ progenitors causes skeletal
chondrodysplasia mimicking the human Ihh gene mutation
phenotype
To determine whether postnatal ablation of Ihh in Acan+ cells causes
a human Ihh gene mutation-like phenotype in mice, Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ mice
were mated with Acan-creERT transgenic mice. Acan-creERT;Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ
mice were born according to the Mendelian ratio and did not show
any phenotypic abnormalities. Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ and Acan-creERT;Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ mice
were i.p. administered TM at P3 and P5 and harvested at P30. The
Figure 1. Acan+ progenitors are major contributors
to postnatal skeleton development
(A–D) Acan-creERT;tdTomato mice were administered
tamoxifen (TM) at P3 and harvested at P30. (A) Repre-
sentative ﬂuorescent images from frozen sections of the
knee (left panel), articular cartilage (middle panel), and
meniscus (right panel). (B) Representative ﬂuorescent
images from frozen sections of the tibia, growth plate,
trabecular bone, and cortical bone (GP, growth plate; Tra,
trabecular bone; Cor, cortical bone). (C) Representative
ﬂuorescent images from frozen sections of the vertebral
bone and IVD (IVD, intervertebral disc; NP, nucleus pul-
posus, AF, annulus ﬁbrosus). (D) Representative confocal
images showing the lambdoid suture of the skull (P, pa-
rietal bone; S, suture). Red: tdTomato; blue: DAPI. (E–G)
Acan-creERT;DTAﬂ/ﬂ or DTA ﬂ/ﬂ littermates were treated
with TM once daily for 2 consecutive days starting at P3
and harvested at P10. (E) Representative X-ray of DTA ﬂ/ﬂ
and Acan-creERT;DTA ﬂ/ﬂ mice at P10. Arrow depicts the
skull and spine development defects. (F) Representative
images of mice that were double stained with alizarin red/
Alcian blue in DTA ﬂ/ﬂ and Acan-creERT;DTA ﬂ/ﬂ mice at
P10. Arrow depicts the skull and spine development de-
fects. Bar is 5mm. (G) Quantity analysis showed the
average body length decreased from 4.9 cm in the Acan-
creERT group to 3.5 cm in the Acan-creERT;DTA ﬂ/ﬂ mice
at P10. Six mice evaluated in each group.
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development
462 Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021
results showed that the phenotype of Ihh-de ﬁcient mice (Ihh cko)
closely mimicked that of humans with Ihh gene mutation-related
skeletal dysplasia defects, including short stature with short spine
and trunk, narrow thorax ( Figures S1 A– S1D), smaller skull, and
shorter neck (Figure S1B) and extremity bones (Figures S1E and S1F).
SAG rescues defective chondrocyte proliferation and
differentiation caused by Ihh ablation
To test whether defective chondrocyte function caused by loss of Ihh
can be rescued by SAG treatment, we ﬁrst performed in vitro analysis
of chondrocytes isolated from Ihh-ablated mouse cartilage tissue and
determined the ideal concentration used in the study (Figure S2). The
results of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) staining showed that Ihh dele-
tion inhibited chondrocyte proliferation, and this effect was rescued
by SAG treatment ( Figures 2A and 2B). To further investigate the ef-
fect of SAG on osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation, Ihh-deﬁ-
cient chondrocytes were treated with or without SAG accompanied
by either osteogenic medium for 21 days or chondrogenic medium
for 14 days (Figure S3). The results showed that ablation of Ihh signif-
icantly inhibited the osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation of
Acan+ cells. Moreover, SAG treatment restored osteogenesis (Figures
2C and 2D) and chondrogenesis in Ihh-de ﬁcient chondrocytes ( Fig-
ures 2E and 2F).
Ablation of Ihh does not affect cilia formation and orientation
The primary cilium plays a critical role in Hh signaling, and many fea-
tures of ciliopathies are associated with abnormal Hh signaling. 22
However, whether Hh also affects cilia formation remains unclear.
Figure 2. SAG rescues deﬁcient chondrocyte
proliferation and differentiation in Ihh silenced cells
(A) Immunoﬂuorescent staining for BrdU and DAPI
showing the proliferative chondrocyte from wild-type, Ihh-
deﬁcient, and Ihh-deﬁcient with SAG treatment groups.
Red: tdTomato; blue: DAPI. (B) Quantitative measurement
of BrdU+ cells in (A) (n = 3, triplicates per group). (C) Alizarin
red staining for osteogenesis ability of chondrocytes from
wild-type, Ihh-deﬁcient, and Ihh-deﬁcient with SAG
treatment groups. (D) Quantitative measurement of os-
teogenesis differentiation ability in (C) (n = 3, triplicates per
group). (E) Alcian bule staining for chondrogenesis differ-
entiation ability of chondrocyte from wild-type, Ihh-deﬁ-
cient, and Ihh-deﬁcient with SAG treatment groups. (F)
Quantitative measurement of chondrogenesis differenti-
ation ability in (E) (n = 3, triplicates per group). All data are
reported as mean ± SD. Statistical signiﬁcance was
determined by one-way ANOVA. ***p < 0.0001.
To answer this question, we isolated and
cultured primary chondrocytes from cartilage
tissue of Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ control and Ihh cko mice that
were injected with TM at P3 and P5 and har-
vested at P30 in vitro or stained cilia in samples
from different groups of mice in vivo . The iso-
lated chondrocytes were treated with SAG for
24 h, and then ciliogenesis was analyzed by immuno ﬂuorescence
staining of Arl13b (a primary cilia marker). 23 The results showed
that cilia were present in all groups ( Figure 3A). Quantitative analysis
showed no signi ﬁcant differences in cilia number, length, or orienta-
tion among the wild-type, Ihh-deﬁcient, and Ihh-deﬁcient SAG treat-
ment groups either in vivo or in vitro (Figure 3 B; Figures S4 A and
S4B). These results indicated that Ihh is not essential for ciliogenesis
and orientation.
SAG enhances Hh signaling activation by promoting Smo
localization to cilia
Accumulation of the membrane protein Smo within the primary
cilium is a key event in Hh signal activation. 22 To test how ciliary
Smo responds to SAG in Ihh-deﬁcient cells, chondrocytes of articular
cartilage isolated from TM-injected Acan-creERT;Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ or Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ
mice were treated with SAG for 24 h, and then Smo and Gli1 locali-
zation was detected by immuno ﬂuorescence staining. Lower levels of
Smo in the cilium or Gli1 protein in the nucleus were detected in Ihh-
deﬁcient chondrocytes than in control chondrocytes. In contrast,
SAG treatment resulted in dramatically increased Smo translocation
to the primary cilium and Gli1 accumulation in the nucleus ( Figures
3C and 3D). These ﬁndings suggested that SAG enhances Hh
signaling activation by promoting Smo localization to cilia.
SAG restores skeletal bone growth and increases the survival
rate of Ihh-deﬁcient mice
To evaluate the effect of SAG treatment on the survival rate, Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ or
Acan-creERT;Ihhﬂ/ﬂ mice were injected with TM at P3 and P5. Then,
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021 463
the TM-injected male and female mice (mixed sexes in each group)
were treated with vehicle (n = 83) or 20 mg/g SAG every other day
starting from P7 (n = 52) or P14 (n = 49) up to P30.
At P7, the body weight and size of Ihhcko mice were signiﬁcantly lower
than those of the control mice ( Figures 4A– 4D); however, the weight
of SAG-treated Ihhcko mice increased signiﬁcantly at P30 (Figures 4E
and 4G). Body length was also signi ﬁcantly increased in SAG-treated
Ihhcko mice compared with vehicle-treated Ihh cko mice (Figures 4E–
4G). The average body length was 133.2 ± 6.1 mm in the SAG-treated
Ihhcko group and 117.2 ± 6.9 mm in the vehicle-treated Ihh cko group
(Figures 4H and 4I). By inspecting all viscera (spleen, liver, heart, kid-
ney, lung, and intestine) ( Figure S5), we found no obvious abnormal-
ities or tumorigenesis in the heart, lungs, kidneys, liver, or spleen, but
intestinal hyperplasia was detected in 6.1% of SAG-treated mice in the
Ihhcko and Ihhﬂ/ﬂ groups.20
We found that the survival rates of Ihh cko mice treated with SAG at
the earlier (P7) and later (P14) time points were 86.5% (45/52) and
83.6% (41/49), respectively, which were signi ﬁcantly higher than
that of Ihh cko mice treated with vehicle, which had a survival rate
of 72.3% (60/83) ( Figure 4 J; Table 1 ); these results indicated that
SAG treatment signi ﬁcantly improves the survival rate regardless
of the time of administration. During the follow-up to P30, none
of the animals in the vehicle-treated wild-type group died (0/83),
while one animal died from bowel obstruction in the SAG-treated
wild-type group (1/41). Notably, all vehicle-treated Ihh cko mice
(23/83) died due to respiratory failure caused by shortening of
the ribs, which restricts pulmonary development. 20 In contrast,
in the SAG-treated Ihh cko mouse group, 7 of 101 mice died during
the follow-up. Among these 7 mice, 5 mice died due to respiratory
distress, and 2 mice died from bowel obstruction. 19,20 These data
indicated that SAG treatment signi ﬁcantly increases the survival
rate of Ihh cko animals.
SAG restores the growth of the appendicular skeleton in Ihh cko
mice
To further analyze the ef ﬁcacy of SAG treatment, X-ray and micro-
computed tomography (micro-CT) analyses were performed in
SAG-treated Ihh cko and control Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ mice. The X-ray results
showed a signi ﬁcant increase in the size of the limbs in SAG-treated
Ihhcko mice compared to that in vehicle-treated Ihh cko littermates.
The lengths of the femur and tibia bones in SAG-treated Ihh cko
mice were signi ﬁcantly increased by 67.4% and 33.1%, respectively,
compared to those in the vehicle-treated Ihh cko group ( Figures 5 A–
5D). Similarly, the lengths of the humerus, radius, and ulna in
SAG-treated Ihh cko mice were signi ﬁcantly increased by 33.8%,
41.3%, and 66.4%, respectively, compared to those in vehicle-treated
Ihhcko mice (Figures S6A– S6D). Consistent with these results, micro-
CT analysis showed marked restoration of bone mass and joint mi-
croarchitecture in SAG-treated Ihh cko mice compared to vehicle-
treated Ihh cko mice ( Figures 5 E– 5J). Trabecular bone parameters
showed a tendency to improve in SAG-treated Ihhcko mice, as the per-
centage of bone volume (BV/TV), trabecular number (Tb.N), and
trabecular thickness (Tb.Th) were increased by 78%, 73.4%, and
90.3%, respectively, and the percentage of trabecular spacing
(Tb.Sp) was decreased by 26% in SAG-treated Ihh cko mice compared
to vehicle-treated Ihhcko mice (Figure 5H). Cortical bone parameters,
including the percentage of cortical area (Ct.Ar), the total cross-
sectional area (Tt.Ar), the cortical bone area fraction (Ct.Ar/Tt. Ar),
and the cortical thickness (Ct.Th), were increased by 86%, 93.4%,
11.2%, and 54.8%, respectively, in SAG-treated Ihhcko mice compared
to vehicle-treated Ihh cko mice ( Figure 5 J). These ﬁndings indicated
that SAG treatment dramatically improved the osteopenia phenotype.
To determine whether SAG treatment affects anabolic bone forma-
tion, we measured bone formation parameters in both SAG- and
vehicle-treated Ihh cko mice by injecting ﬂuorochrome into the mice
at P21 and P27 and harvesting them at P30. As shown in Figure 5O,
Figure 3. SAG promotes Hh activity by recruiting
Smo in cilia
(A) Representative immunoﬂuorescent staining images for
Arl13b and DAPI showed the cilia length and percentage in
chondrocytes from wild-type, Ihh-deﬁcient, and Ihh-deﬁ-
cient with SAG treatment groups. Red: Arl13b; blue: DAPI.
Bar is 5 mm (B) Quantitative measurements of primary cilia
length and percentage of (A) (n = 3, triplicates per group
with at least 100 cells analyzed in each group). (C) Immu-
noﬂuorescent staining for Arl13b, Smo, and DAPI showing
the smoothen expression and localization in chondrocyte
from wild-type, Ihh-deﬁcient, and Ihh-deﬁcient with SAG
treatment groups. Red: Arl13b; white: smoothen; blue:
DAPI. Arrows depict the Smo localization in cilia. Bar is 1mm
(D) Immunoﬂuorescent staining for Gli1 and DAPI showing
the Gli1 expression and localization in chondrocyte from
wild-type, Ihh-deﬁcient, and Ihh-deﬁcient with SAG treat-
ment groups. Red: Gli1; blue: DAPI (n = 3, triplicates per
group). Bar is 10 mm All data are reported as mean ± SD.
Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-way
ANOVA. NS, not statistically signiﬁcant.
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development
464 Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021
the bone formation rate per bone surface (BFR/BS) in the tibia was
signiﬁcantly inhibited in vehicle-treated Ihh cko mice compared to
Ihhﬂ/ﬂ control mice, but it was signi ﬁcantly rescued in SAG-treated
Ihhcko mice. Quantitative analysis showed that the MFR/BS was
0.18 mm 3/mm2/day in vehicle-treated Ihh cko mice and increased to
0.24 mm 3/mm2/day in SAG-treated Ihh cko mice ( Figures 5 K and
5L). These ﬁndings indicated that SAG promotes anabolic bone for-
mation in Ihh-de ﬁcient mice.
SAG treatment rescues defective growth plate formation and the
enchondroma-like phenotype caused by ablation of Ihh
By performing histological analyses of the bones of four limbs at P30,
we found that Safranin O/fast green or alizarin red/Alcian blue stain-
ing showed cellular cartilage islands or rests in the metaphysis of
several joint areas in all Ihh cko mice, including the wrist joint
(Figure 6 A), the knee joint ( Figure 6 B), and the costochondral area
(Figure 6 C). In humans, enchondromas are de ﬁned by benign
Figure 4. SAG restores skeletal defects in a mouse model of human Ihh gene mutation-related dysplasia
(A and B) Gross morphology and X-ray radiographs showed the mouse size and bone image in wild-type, vehicle-treated, and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice at P7. Bar is 1cm (C
and D) Quantitative analysis the body length and weight in (A) and (B) (n = 8 in each group). (E) X-ray radiographs illustrating the effect of SAG treatme nt on skeletal growth at
P30. Wild-type and Ihh-deﬁcient mice were subcutaneously injected with vehicle or SAG 20 mg/g. Bar is 1cm (F and G) Quantitative analysis of the body length and weight
from P7 to P30 (n = 8 in each group). NS1, SAG treated Ihh cko compared with Ihhcko, not statistically signiﬁcant. NS2, Ihhcko compared with Ihhﬂ/lf, not statistically signiﬁcant.
***Ihhcko compared with Ihhﬂ/ﬂ, p < 0.0001. ###SAG treated Ihhcko compared with Ihhcko, p < 0.0001. (H and I) Quantitative analysis of the body length and weight at P30 (n = 8
in each group). (G) The survival proportions analysis among each group. All data are reported as mean ± SD. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-way ANOVA.
***p < 0.0001. NS, not statistically signiﬁcant.
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021 465
intramedullary neoplasms of hyaline cartilage. These ectopic cartilage
rests most likely arise from foci of cartilage displaced or “remodeled
out” of the growth plate. 24– 26 In our study, the cartilage islands
were observed to connect the rests to the adjoining growth plate or
cartilage, and the features of these tissues were highly similar to those
of human enchondroma tissue 25,27 (Figures 6 A– 6D). In addition,
varying cellularity and disorganized cells were detected in a Safranin
O-positive cartilage island, which closely mimics the histomorphol-
ogy of human enchondromas28,29 (Figures 6B and 6C). BrdU staining
showed that 73.2% of cells were BrdU+ in the enchondroma tissues of
the Ihh cko group, but only 17.3% of cells were BrdU+ in the growth
plates of Ihhﬂ/ﬂ mice, suggesting a signi ﬁcant increase in cell prolifer-
ation in enchondroma tissue (Figure S7). Given that Ihh deﬁciency re-
sults in enchondroma-like tissues but does not affect cilia formation
(Figure S4), to further evaluate whether Hh signaling and cilia forma-
tion are altered in human enchondroma, primary cilia were immuno-
stained with an antibody against acetylated tubulin, and Ihh and Gli1
were detected by immuno ﬂuorescence staining in human enchon-
droma samples and comparable articular cartilage samples. The re-
sults showed that both human enchondroma tissues and articular
samples had similar cilia numbers and lengths ( Figures S8 A– S8C).
The immunoﬂuorescence staining results showed that the expression
levels of Ihh and Gli1 in enchondroma tissues were much lower than
those in control tissues, suggesting that the reduction of Ihh expres-
sion is correlated with an enchondroma-like phenotype ( Figures
S8D and S8E). To further test whether SAG can inhibit enchon-
droma-like tissue formation, we treated Ihhcko mice with SAG. Treat-
ment with SAG signiﬁcantly reduced the formation of enchondroma-
like tissue from 100% in vehicle-treated Ihh cko mice to only 16.7% in
SAG-treated Ihhcko mice (17/101) (Figure 6D). Speciﬁcally, the results
from alizarine red/Alcian blue and Safranin O/fast green staining of
the ribs showed that deletion of Ihh caused enlarged chondro-osseus
junctions of the ribs and numerous enchondroma-like tissues in the
ribs and knee in Ihh cko mice, and these effects were signi ﬁcantly
reduced by SAG treatment ( Figures 6 B and 6C). In addition, we
also found that the percentage of enchondroma tissue with a diameter
greater than 1 mm decreased from 76.6% in vehicle-treated Ihh cko
mice to 8.9% in SAG-treated Ihh cko mice ( Figure 6 E). These results
suggested that mutation of Ihh can cause enchondromas and that
SAG can effectively reduce the incidence of enchondromas in Ihh-
deﬁcient mice. Moreover, Safranin O/fast green staining showed
that SAG treatment signi ﬁcantly rescued growth plate and subchon-
dral bone formation in tibias of Ihhcko mice compared to vehicle treat-
ment ( Figure 6 B). These results demonstrate that Ihh ablation in
Acan+ cells caused enchondroma formation. SAG treatment pro-
moted osteogenesis and chondrogenesis and reduced enchondroma
formation in Ihh-de ﬁcient mice in vivo.
To characterize the effect of SAG on the expression of chondrocyte
marker genes, mouse articular cartilage was isolated from Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ
and vehicle- and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice at P30, and then total
RNA was extracted from these samples. Real-time RT-qPCR and
western blot con ﬁrmed the loss of Ihh in the articular cartilage of
the Ihhcko mice (Figure 6F; Figure S9). Moreover, we found that abla-
tion of Ihh in cartilage signi ﬁcantly reduced the levels of Ihh, Aggre-
can, Sox9, Col2a1, patch1, and Gli1 to 0.1-, 0.2-, 0.2-, 0.3-, 0.2-, and
0.3-fold, respectively, in Ihhcko mouse cartilage compared with Ihhﬂ/ﬂ
mouse cartilage ( Figure 6F). In contrast, SAG treatment signi ﬁcantly
upregulated the expression levels of these genes in Ihh cko mice
compared with vehicle treatment ( Figure 6F).
SAG restores the growth of the axial skeleton in Ihh-deﬁcient
mice
Patients with Ihh gene mutation-related syndromes often exhibit pla-
tyspondyly and spinal stenosis. 30 To test whether deletion of Ihh in
Acan+ cells also affects spine and IVD development, we examined
the spine and tail of Ihh cko mice and characterized the effects of
SAG treatment. Coronal and sagittal X-ray analyses of the axial skel-
eton showed no obvious scoliosis or kyphosis in Ihh cko mice at P30
(Figures S1 A– S1D). To assess the differences in the size of the axial
skeleton, we measured the length of third lumbar vertebral bodies
(L3), which are usually affected in Ihh gene mutation-related syn-
dromes. MicroCT analysis showed that the length of L3 in Ihh cko
mice was only 38.4% of the length in Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ control mice. Treatment
with SAG signiﬁcantly increased the lumbar vertebral length of Ihhcko
mice compared to the control treatment (+32.1%) ( Figures 7A– 7C).
The tail length in SAG-treated mice was 60% longer than that in
vehicle-treated Ihh cko mice at day 30 ( Figures 7 D and 7E). Analysis
of Safranin O/fast green staining of the IVD in the L3 – L4 of P30
mice further showed that the nucleus pulposus (NP) was surrounded
by a well-formed annulus ﬁbrosus (AF) in the Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ IVD. However,
ablation of Ihh led to IVD defects, including disrupted stereotypical
columnar structure of the chondrocytes in the GP, reduced height
of the endplate cartilage (EP) region, reduced number and size of
Table 1. SAG treatment in Ihh CKO mice
Treatment Survival rate Body length Vertebral length Femur length Tibia length
WT (n = 83) 100% –– – –
IhhCKO (n = 83) 72.3% –– – –
SAG (20 mg/g) (n = 52) protocol 1 86.5% a +18.9%a +32.1%a +67.4%a +33.1%a
SAG (20 mg/g) (n = 49) protocol 2 83.6% a +15.5%a +20.6%a +20.4%a +11.9%a
Survival rate and gain in length (percentage) for body, vertebral, femur, and tibia of SAG-treated mice compared with vehicle-treated mice. Protoco l1 :2 0 mg/g SAG every other day
treating from P7 (n = 52) to P30. Protocol 2: 20 mg/g SAG every other day treating from P14 (n = 49) to P30.
ap < 0.05 by one-way ANOVA test.
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development
466 Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021
EP cells, disrupted NP and AF patterns, and complete loss of gel-like
matrix surrounding NP. SAG treatment evidently rescued GP, EP,
AF, and NF formation and patterning in Ihh cko mice (Figure 7F).
SAG restores skull and rib development impaired by Ihh
deﬁciency
Given that Ihh gene mutation-related skeletal dysplasia display ab-
normalities in craniofacial development in human and mouse Ihh cko
models, we therefore assessed whether early treatment with SAG
could correct defective cartilage or bone development in the skull of
Ihhcko mice. The results from X-ray, micro-CT, and alizarine red/
Alcian blue staining analyses revealed that SAG treatment increased
the anterior-posterior length and width of the skull and reduced the
brachycephalic appearance of Ihh cko mice compared with vehicle
treatment ( Figures 8 A– 8D). Quantitative analysis showed that the
skull width and skull length signi ﬁcantly increased by 2.4% and
Figure 5. SAG increases the growth of the appendicular skeleton in Ihh-deﬁcient mice
(A and B) Radiograph of femur and tibia in wild-type, vehicle-treated, and SAG-treated Ihh-deﬁcient mice. Bar is 200mm.(C and D) Quantity analysis the femur and tibia length
in (A) and (B) (n = 8). (E–G) Representative 3D micro-CT of the distal femur metaphysis cross-sectional area in wild-type, SAG-treated, and vehicle-t reated Ihh-deﬁcient mice.
(H) Quantitative analysis of the bone volume (BV/TV), trabecular number (Tb.N), trabecular thickness (Tb.Th), and trabecular spacing (Tb.Sp) in femur trabecular bone (n = 6 in
each group). (I) Representative 3D micro-CT of the distal femur metaphysis cortical bone (n = 6 in each group). Bar is 5 mm. (J) Quantitative analysis of the cortical area (Ct.Ar),
the total cross-sectional area (Tt.Ar), the cortical bone area fraction (CtAr/TtAr), and the cortical thickness (Ct.Th) (n = 6 in each group). (K) Dyn amic histomorphometry of tibia
after double calcein labeling. BFR/BS, bone formation rate per bone surface; BS, bone surface. Bar is 5 mm. (L) Quantitative analysis of BFR/BS from double-calcein labeling.
All data are reported as mean ± SD. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-way ANOVA. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001. NS, not statistically signiﬁcant.
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021 467
(legend on next page)
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development
468 Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021
18.5%, respectively, in SAG-treated Ihh cko mice compared to vehicle-
treated Ihhcko mice (Figure 8E). These results demonstrated that SAG
treatment effectively corrects defective skull development.
Narrow thorax and smaller rib cage are often present in human Ihh
gene mutation-related syndrome patients.1,3 Consistent with these ob-
servations, Ihhcko mice also exhibited narrow thorax and smaller rib
cage at P30. SAG treatment signi ﬁcantly corrected defective rib cage
development and sternum length in Ihh cko mice (Figure 8F). Specif-
ically, the length of the sternum increased from 1.2 cm in vehicle-
treated Ihhcko mice to 1.56 cm in SAG-treated Ihhcko mice (Figure 8G).
DISCUSSION
Various inactivation mutations of the gene encoding Ihh lead to loss of
function of the Ihh ligand, resulting in skeletal chondrodysplasias,
including acrocapitofemoral dysplasia, brachydactyly type A1, and
human short stature. 1– 3 Currently, there are no effective treatments
for these diseases due to the lack of an ideal animal model. 4 Since
global deletion of Ihh at the embryonic stage or deletion of Ihh embry-
onically in type II collagen-positive (Col2+) cells causes mouse embry-
Figure 6. SAG reduces the enchondroma incidence in Ihh-deﬁcient mice
(A) Representative images of forelimbs stained with Alcian blue and alizarin red in wild-type, vehicle-treated, and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice. (B) Representative images of tibia
stained with Safranin O/fast green in wild-type, vehicle-treated, and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice. (C) Representative images of ribs stained with Alcian blue and alizarin red and
Safranin O/fast green from wild-type, vehicle-treated, and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice at P30. Arrows depict the enchondroma-like tissues. Bar is 200 mm(D) Quantitative
analysis of enchondroma incidence in each group (n = 8/group). (E) Quantitative analysis of the percentage of lesion with diameter > 1 mm in each group ( n = 8/group). (F)
Real-time RT-qPCR analysis of Ihh, Col2a1, Sox9, Aggrecan, Ptch1, and Gli1 expression levels in the cartilage tissue from each group (n = 3, triplicates per group). All data are
reported as mean ± SD. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-way ANOVA. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001. NS, not statistically signiﬁcant.
Figure 7. SAG rescues the growth of the axial
skeleton defected in Ihh cko mice
(A) Radiograph for spine of wild-type, vehicle-treated, and
SAG-treated Ihh cko mice. Bar is 2mm (B) Representative
3D microCT for the spine of wild-type, vehicle-treated,
and SAG-treated Ihhcko mice. Bar is 1mm. (C) Quantitative
analysis of L3 vertebral length from wild-type, vehicle-
treated, and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice (n = 8 in each
group). (D) Representative images of tail stained with Al-
cian blue (cartilage) and alizarin red (bone) in each group.
(E) Quantitative analysis of tail length from wild-type,
vehicle-treated, and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice (n = 8 mice
in each group). (F) Safranin O/fast green staining of cor-
onal sections of L4-L5 IVD in wild-type, Ihh mutation, and
SAG-treated Ihhcko mice at P30. Bar is 100 mmAll data are
reported as mean ± SD. Statistical signiﬁcance was
determined by one-way ANOVA. ***p < 0.0001. NS, not
statistically signiﬁcant.
onic lethality, 7,10,31 we generated TM-inducible
Ihhcko mice in this study by using Acan-creERT
mice, which label the majority of Acan+ cells in
the postnatal skeleton following TM injection at
P3.18,21 At P30, we found that the phenotype
of Ihh cko mice closely mimics that of humans
with Ihh gene mutation-related dysplasia.
In vivo , we found for the ﬁrst time that SAG
treatment in Ihhcko mice rescued growth plate and bone development,
resulting in signi ﬁcant skeletal growth and a reduction in mortality,
without evidence of toxicity. We also provide the ﬁrst evidence that
Ihh ablation in Acan+ cells led to the incidence of enchondromas
and that this effect was signi ﬁcantly inhibited by SAG treatment.
The role of Ihh (or related signaling) in postnatal skeletal develop-
ment has been investigated in several studies. 8,32– 35 Consistent with
our results, postnatal deletion of Ihh with Col2-creERT by adminis-
tration of TM caused premature fusion of growth plates of various
endochondral bones in mice, resulting in dwar ﬁsm in mutant mice.
In the “canonical” Hh signaling cascade, binding of the Hh ligand to
the Ptch1 receptor leads to the release of the inhibition of the receptor
Smo, thereby causing Smo traf ﬁcking into cilia to initiate a signaling
cascade that culminates in the activation of Gli proteins ( Figure S10).
Gli1 expression is one of the reliable indicators of downstream Hh
pathway activity. 16,17,36 SAG, a derivative of chlorobenzothiophene,
is a Hh pathway agonist 37 that activates Smo to activate Hh 19 in the
presence of an intact primary cilium. 38– 44 Although Hynes et al. 45
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021 469
demonstrated that SAG promotes ciliogenesis in renal epithelial cells
with defective cilia formation, whether ablation of Ihh affects cilio-
genesis is still unclear. 39,46 Our study demonstrated that ablation of
Ihh does not affect cilia formation and orientation but signi ﬁcantly
disrupts cilia-mediated Hh signal transduction in the Acan+ cell
lineage. Moreover, SAG treatment did not affect ciliogenesis. These
results suggest that Ihh and SAG affect cilia-mediated Hh signaling
activation but do not affect cilia assembly.
Although SAG administration has shown promising effects in pre-
venting glucocorticoid-induced neonatal cerebellar injury20 and treat-
ing Down syndrome, 19 whether SAG is effective in the treatment of
bone disorders is largely unknown. 42 By performing immunoﬂuores-
cence staining of Smo, we found that SAG enhanced Hh activity by
promoting the ciliary localization of Smo. Both Aggrecan and collagen
II are markers for chondrocyte differentiation. It was reported that
SAG can promote chondrocyte differentiation. 47 In our study, SAG
is a smoothen agonist that functions to active Hh signaling down-
stream of Ihh. Our study suggested that SAG can completely rescue
the expression of downstream gene expression through regulating
Gli activation, which drives downstream chondrocyte marker gene
expression in Ihh-silenced chondrocytes in vitro . Consistent with
these results, SAG treatment markedly suppressed growth plate de-
fects, delayed differentiation and secondary ossi ﬁcation, and restored
skull, vertebrae, and rib cage development in Ihh cko mice. This evi-
Figure 8. SAG improves skull and rib development
impaired by Ihh deﬁciency
(A and B) Representative X-rays of skulls from wild-type,
vehicle-treated, and SAG-treated Ihhcko mice. Bar is 1mm
(C) Representative images of skulls stained with Alcian
blue and alizarin red in each group. Bar is 1mm (D)
Representative 3D microCT for the skulls of wild-type,
vehicle-treated, and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice. Bar is
1mm(E) Quantitative analysis of skull length and width in
wild-type, vehicle-treated, and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice
(n = 8 mice in each group). All data are reported as mean ±
SD. Statistical signiﬁcance was determined by one-way
ANOVA. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.0001. NS, not
statistically signiﬁcant. (F) Representative radiograph im-
ages of rib cages from wild-type, vehicle-treated, and
SAG-treated Ihh cko mice at P30. Bar is 1cm(G) Quantita-
tive analysis of sternum length from wild-type, vehicle-
treated, and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice (n = 8 mice/group).
All data are reported as mean ± SD. Statistical signiﬁcance
was determined by one-way ANOVA. ***p < 0.0001.
dence suggests that SAG is a potential drug for
correcting facial appearance and bone disorders
and, most importantly, reducing the early mor-
tality that often occurs in children with human
Ihh gene mutation. 1– 4
Human Ihh gene mutation-related skeletal dys-
plasias, such as acrocapitofemoral dysplasia,
usually show anomalies including shorter
spines, smaller vertebrae, short limbs, brachydactyly, and narrow tho-
rax.1 Similarly, Ihh cko mice showed defective axial skeletons with
smaller lumbar vertebral bodies, short limbs, narrow thorax, and
impaired development of cartilage, IVDs, and lumbar vertebrae, sug-
gesting that Ihh cko mice are an ideal human Ihh gene mutation
dysplasia-related mouse model. Moreover, our data demonstrated
that SAG effectively treats the Ihh gene mutation-related dysplasia
phenotype, and the ef ﬁcacy of SAG treatment is dependent on the
time of SAG administration. Treatment with SAG beginning on
P14 ef ﬁciently increased the body weight and length of Ihh cko mice
compared to vehicle treatment. However, earlier treatment with
SAG beginning on P7 was more effective in preventing the dwar ﬁsm
phenotype compared to the treatment beginning on P14. These ﬁnd-
ings suggest that earlier administration of SAG to children will likely
be more effective in correcting the defective skeletal and craniofacial
development associated with skeletal dysplasia caused by Ihh gene
mutation. Additionally, we noticed the improvement to the skull
and rib are not as apparent as the femur/tibia. The exact reason re-
mains unclear. It is known that Ihh regulates chondrocyte prolifera-
tion, differentiation, and osteoblast differentiation at the postnatal
stage. It is possible that postnatal osteoblast differentiation and
bone formation may count on the Smo signaling-dependent role of
Ihh, while chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation rely on
both the Smo signaling-dependent and Smo signaling-independent
roles of Ihh. Thus, SAG can more effectively rescue the defective
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development
470 Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021
bone but just partially rescue the growth plate and cartilage. More-
over, the expression pattern of Hh is varied in different bone tissues,
and it is mainly located in prehypertrophic chondrocytes adjacent to
the proliferation zone during development. The different rescue ef-
fects may also re ﬂect the tissues sensitive extent or requirement to
Ihh expression levels varied in different tissues. 30,48 The speci ﬁc
mechanism needs to be investigated in the future. Noteworthily,
although majority of cells in the growth plate are tdTomato positive,
we found that some cells in the growth plate express lower or absent
tdTomato ﬂuorescence. Consistently, this phenomenon also occurs in
the study by Ono et al. 21 One possible reason is that Ihh was not
completely ablated under tamoxifen induction, given that our real-
time RT-PCR and western blot result showed that there are still low
levels of Ihh expression in the bone tissues of Aggrecan-creER-
T;Ihhﬂ/ﬂ mice. Therefore, the Aggrecan-creERT;Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ mouse model
may not fully recapitulate the human phenotype with homozygous
mutation of Ihh, but nonetheless it has a severe phenotype that can
be rescued by SAG and is therefore still a valid model.
Although activation of the Hh pathway by SAG has been shown to be
efﬁcacious in correcting structural and cognitive de ﬁcits in a Down
syndrome mouse model 19 and preventing glucocorticoid-induced
neonatal cerebellar injury,20 there are some concerns about its clinical
application due to the associated side effects, such as tumorigen-
esis.19,20 In this study, SAG-treated mice had no tumor formation
or obvious complications during the 30-day follow-up. Consistent
with this result, Das et al. 19 found that SAG treatment did not cause
medulloblastoma, precancerous lesions, or cancer in animals even at a
dose of 140 mg/g per day. 20 Notably, in our study, a few animals
treated with SAG had intestinal hyperplasia, showing increased thick-
ness of the smooth muscle layer, which raises the possibility of bowel
obstruction.20 Thus, this study indicates that additional mechanistic
and preclinical toxicity studies are needed to analyze the effect of
SAG on intestinal tissue and function.
Some studies have indicated that Hh signaling is associated with
various stages of carcinogenesis in different tumors. 12,15,16,19,49 For
example, in pancreatic and esophageal cancer, activation of the Hh
signaling pathway was found in the early stages of tumors as well
as in metastatic tumors. 50 Treatment of human chondrosarcoma
SW1353 cells with Hh pathway inhibitor-4 (HPI-4) signi ﬁcantly
decreased proliferation, invasion, and migration capacity. 51,52
Another study demonstrated that knockdown of Gli1 expression
by small interfering RNA (siRNA) downregulated the expression
of the key Hh pathway components Ptch1 and Smo and reduced
the growth and survival of chondrosarcoma cells. 52,53 These studies
provide a convincing rationale for investigating Hh pathway inhibi-
tors as a novel therapeutic option for chondrosarcoma patients with
aberrant activation of the Hh signaling pathway. Although preclini-
cal data have demonstrated hyperactive Hh signaling in a wide range
of malignancies, the clinical data from a phase II randomized pla-
cebo-controlled trial of Hh inhibitors in patients with advanced
chondrosarcoma have been discouraging. 14 Moreover, it was
recently reported that Hh signaling is downregulated in several can-
cers and that its restoration suppresses tumor growth. 15 In our study,
we found for the ﬁrst time that ablation of Ihh in Acan+ cells caused
an enchondroma-like phenotype in the rib and growth plate regions
and that activation of Hh signaling by SAG decreased the incidence
and size of enchondroma-like tissue. Consistent with these ﬁndings,
Rozeman et al. 54 also found that Hh signaling activity is reduced in
some human enchondromas. However, the ﬁnding that chondro-
cyte-speciﬁc overexpression of Gli2, a downstream transcriptional
activator of the Hh pathway, causes enchondroma 41 suggests the
possibility that a certain range of Hh levels is essential for normal
physiological function, while overactivation or disruption of Hh
signaling leads to enchondroma genesis, which needs to be further
studied in the future.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice
All procedures regarding housing, breeding, and the collection of an-
imal tissues were performed according to protocols approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania in accordance with the IACUC ’s relevant
guidelines and regulations. All animals were of the C57BL strain.
TdTomato55 and DTAﬂ/ﬂ56 mice were purchased from Jackson Lab-
oratory (Bar Harbor, ME, USA). Acan-creERT and Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ mice
were supplied by Eiki Koyama. 18 Acan-creERT;Ihhﬂ/ﬂ, Acan-
creERT;tdTomato, and Acan-creERT;DTA ﬂ/ﬂ mice were generated
by breeding Acan-creERT mice with Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ, tdTomato, or DTA ﬂ/ﬂ
mice, respectively. TM (T5648, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) solution
preparation and administration were performed as previously
described.57 Brieﬂy, TM was ﬁrst dissolved in 100% ethanol
(100 mg/mL) and then diluted with sterile corn oil to a ﬁnal concen-
tration of 10 mg/mL. For neonatal injection, Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ, Acan-creERT;
Ihhﬂ/ﬂ, Acan-creERT;tdTomato, and Acan-creERT;DTA ﬂ/ﬂ mice
were administered the same dose of TM (75 mg TM/kg body weight)
at P3 and/or P5.
Preparation and systemic administration of SAG
SAG (B5837) was purchased from APExBIO Technology (Houston,
TX, USA). 19 The chlorobenzothiophene derivative SAG (molecular
weight, 490.06) was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to
5 mM and further diluted with normal saline or culture medium.
Vehicle controls comprised saline containing an equivalent concen-
tration of DMSO. P7 or P14 Acan-creERT;Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ or Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ pups
were i.p. injected with SAG (20 mg/g) or vehicle every other day until
they were harvested at P30. 10 nM SAG was used in vitro.58
Human samples
Human samples were obtained from US Biomax (Rockville, MD,
USA). Three enchondromas and three normal articular cartilage sam-
ples were analyzed for the presence of primary cilia.
H&E staining and histological measurements
Organs or human tissues were harvested and stored in 10% formalin
for further histological analysis with standard paraf ﬁn-embedding
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021 471
techniques. Using a standard microtome (RM2255, Leica), 6 mm sec-
tions were prepared and stained with H&E. Histological measure-
ments were performed on randomly selected samples from all groups
and were analyzed blindly by a pathologist. Organs were observed for
macroscopic abnormalities such as modi ﬁcation of color or texture
and presence of nodules. Microscopically, pathological criteria
included but were not limited to modi ﬁcation of organ architecture
or cell morphology; presence of ﬁbrosis, cellular dysplasia, metaplasia,
or atypia; and presence of in ﬂammatory foci.
Alizarin red/Alcian blue staining
Alizarin red/Alcian blue staining was used to stain the mouse skeleton
as described previously. 57,59 Brieﬂy, the samples were ﬁxed with 90%
ethanol and then stained with 0.01% Alcian blue solution (26385-01,
Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatﬁeld, PA, USA) and 1% alizarin red
S solution (A47503, Thomas Scienti ﬁc, Swedesboro, NJ, USA). The
stained skeleton samples were stored in glycerol.
Safranin O/fast green staining
Mouse IVDs, tibia, and ribs were excised, ﬁxed with 10% natural
buffered formalin, and decalci ﬁed in 10% ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA) for 10 days at 4 /C14C. The samples were embedded in
parafﬁn. Using a standard microtome (RM2255, Leica), 6- mm sec-
tions were prepared and subsequently stained with Safranin O/fast
green stain to visualize cartilage and assess proteoglycan content as
described previously. 38,57 The slides were stained with Weigert ’s
iron hematoxylin and fast green and then stained with 0.1% Safranin
O solution.
Cell isolation and culture
Primary chondrocytes were isolated using published methods. 60,61
Brieﬂy, TM-injected Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ and Acan-creERT;Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ mice were
euthanized at P10. Articular cartilage from the femoral heads, femoral
condyles, and tibia plateaus was isolated, followed by incubation with
collagenase type IV (Worthington, Lakewood, NJ, USA) (3 mg/mL)
for 45 min at 37 /C14C. Cartilage pieces were obtained and incubated
in 0.5 mg/mL collagenase type IV solution overnight at 37 /C14C. The
cells were then ﬁltered through a 40- mm cell strainer and cultured
in DMEM culture medium containing 10% FBS.
In vitro cell differentiation assay
Chondrocytes isolated from Ihh cko mice were treated with 10 nM
SAG. The three groups of chondrogenic and osteoblastic differenti-
ation were induced with different differentiation media and detected
by staining with Alcian blue (26385-01, Electron Microscopy Sci-
ences) and alizarin red S (A47503, Thomas Scienti ﬁc, Swedesboro,
NJ, USA), respectively. For osteogenesis, the cells were induced
with osteogenic media for 21 days as described previously. 62 For
chondrogenesis, micromass culture was performed as described pre-
viously.60 Brieﬂy, micromasses were obtained by pipetting 20 mLo f
primary chondrocytes into individual wells of 24-well plates.
Following a 3-h attachment period without medium, the growth me-
dium was gently added into the wells with cells. Differentiation was
induced by insulin transferrin selenium (ITS) supplementation for
14 days. Quantitative analysis of Alcian blue and alizarin red S
was performed as described previously. 60
Immunoﬂuorescence staining
Mice or human tissues were harvested and stored in 10% formalin for
further histological analysis with standard paraf ﬁn-embedding tech-
niques. Using a standard microtome (RM2255, Leica), 6- mms e c t i o n s
were prepared. The sections were deparafﬁnized and incubated either
in microwaved citrate buffer for 20 min or with proteinase K (20 mg/
mL, D3001-2-5, Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA) for 10 min at
room temperature. Subsequently, the sections were blocked in 5%
normal serum (10,000 C, Thermo Fisher Scienti ﬁc, Waltham, MA,
USA) in PBS-T (0.4% Triton X-100 in PBS). Then, the sections were
incubated with antibodies against Ihh (1:100, ab34710, Abcam, Wal-
tham, MA, USA), Gli1 (1:100, ab34712, Abcam, Waltham, MA,
USA), Smo (1:100, ab34710, Abcam, Waltham, MA, USA), acetylated
tubulin (1:500, T6793, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), or Arl13b (1:100,
ab34710, Abcam, Waltham, MA, USA) in blocking buffer at 4/C14Co v e r -
night. Then, the sections were washed 3 times with PBS and incubated
with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-rabbit (1:200, A11008, Invitro-
gen) or Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated anti-mouse (1:200, A-21236, Invi-
trogen) secondary antibody for 1 h. Coverslips were mounted with
FluoroShield (F6057, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA).
Chondrocytes harvested from Ihh cko mice were treated with SAG for
24 h and then serum-starved for 48 h, washed with PBS, and ﬁxed
with 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature. The ﬁxed cells
from the control and SAG-treated groups were permeabilized with
0.05% Triton X-100 and then incubated with antibodies against Ihh
(1:100, ab34710, Abcam, Waltham, MA, USA), Gli1 (1:100,
ab34712, Abcam, Waltham, MA, USA), Smo (1:100, ab34710, Ab-
cam, Waltham, MA, USA), or Arl13b (1:100, ab34710, Abcam, Wal-
tham, MA, USA) in blocking buffer at 4 /C14C overnight. Then, the
samples were washed 3 times with PBS and incubated with Alexa
Fluor 488-conjugated anti-rabbit (1:200, A11008, Invitrogen, Wal-
tham, MA, USA) or Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated anti-mouse (1:200,
A-21236, Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) secondary antibody for
1 h. Coverslips were mounted with FluoroShield (F6057, Sigma-Al-
drich, St. Louis, MO, USA).
To quantify cilia length, z stack images of multiple ﬁelds were
randomly captured. The cilia were measured by drawing a boundary
across the length of the primary cilium using the freehand tool and
measuring cilia length by using ImageJ software. A total of at least
200 cells from each section of each sample (40 /C2magniﬁcation, ﬁve
sections collected per sample) were measured. To quantify ciliated
cell percentage, z stack images of multiple ﬁelds were randomly
collected. Ciliated cells were counted on each image. At least 30 im-
ages were measured. The percentage of ciliated cells was calculated
from the ratio of the number of ciliated cells to the total number of
cells observed in each compartment and each sample (40 /C2magniﬁ-
cation, ﬁve sections collected per sample). Six mice were evaluated in
each group. The average ciliated cell percentage and cilia length in
each sample were pooled and calculated by two authors. 38
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development
472 Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021
BrdU cell proliferation assay
Cells isolated from Ihhcko mice were treated with 10 nM SAG for 24 h.
The cultures were incubated with BrdU solution (1:100, 000103, In-
vitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) for 20 h and stained with BrdU with
a BrdU staining kit (1:100, MA3071, Invitrogen, Waltham, MA,
USA) according to the manufacturer ’s instructions. Sections (6 mm
thick) were prepared as described for immuno ﬂuorescence staining
and stained with a BrdU staining kit (1:100, MA3071, Invitrogen,
Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer ’s instructions.
The BrdU-positive cell number and total cell number were counted
in 10 images per sample. The number of BrdU-positive cells is indi-
cated as a percentage of the total cell number. The BrdU assay was
repeated using three independent samples for each experimental
group.
X-ray and micro-CT scan
X-rays of all skeletons were taken with a Faxitron X-ray machine (Ed-
imex). The total length was measured from the nose to the end of the
last caudal vertebra; the tail was measured starting at the ﬁrst caudal
vertebra examined with X-ray.
Quantitative analysis of the gross bone morphology and micro-
architecture was performed with a micro-CT system and software
(Micro-CT 35, Scanco Medical AG, Brüttisellen, Switzerland) in the
Penn Center for Musculoskeletal Disorders (PCMD) at the University
of Pennsylvania.63 Brieﬂy, the lumbar spine (L3 – L5), lower limbs, or
skull of Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ, vehicle-treated, and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice at P30
were ﬁxed, scanned, and reconstituted into three-dimensional images.
The cross-sectional scans were analyzed to evaluate the changes in the
entire femur. The regions of interest (ROIs) were then compiled into
three-dimensional (3D) datasets using a Gaussian ﬁlter (sigma = 1.2,
support = 2) to reduce noise and converted to binary images with a
ﬁxed grayscale threshold of 316. Two hundred slices (2 mm) above
the highest point of the growth plate were contoured for trabecular
bone analysis, including the percentage of bone volume (BV/TV,
%), trabecular number (Tb.N, mm /C01), trabecular thickness (Tb.Th,
mm), and trabecular spacing (Tb.Sp, mm). The cortical bone architec-
ture was assessed at the distal femoral metaphysis and midshaft. Fifty
slices (0.5 mm) of the femur midshaft were contoured for cortical bone
analysis, including the cortical area (Ct.Ar, mm 2), total area (Tt.Ar,
mm2), cortical area fraction (Ct.Ar/Tt.Ar, %), and cortical thickness
(Ct.Th, mm). Six mice were evaluated in each group.
Real-time RT-PCR analysis
Articular cartilage tissues were dissected from the knees of Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ and
vehicle- and SAG-treated Ihh cko mice at P30 and immediately placed
in TRIzol for total RNA isolation (15596018, Thermo Fisher Scienti-
ﬁc) according to the manufacturer ’s instructions. cDNA was synthe-
sized from 2 mg of total RNA. qPCR was performed with SYBR Green
PCR Master Mix (B21202, Bimake). All qPCRs were run in triplicate,
and gene expression was normalized to the expression of GAPDH.
The calculation of relative expression was performed according to
the 2-ddCT method. Each reaction was run in triplicate and indepen-
dently repeated three times. The sequences and product lengths for
each primer pair are included in Table 2.
Western blotting
Western blotting was performed to detect Ihh expression using the
rabbit anti-Ihh antibody (1:400, sc-271101, Santa Cruz) as described
previously.59 Long bone tissues from 4-week-old Ihh ﬂ/ﬂ and Ihh cko
mice were lysed with NP 40 buffer (1% NP-40, 0.15 M NaCl,
50 mM Tris [pH 8.0]) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail
(PI78441, Fisher Scienti ﬁc). The cell lysates were centrifuged at
12,000 /C2g for 10 min at 4 /C14C, and the supernatants were stored at
/C080/C14C. Protein concentration was measured using BCA protein assay
reagent (23225, Fisher Scienti ﬁc). Equal amounts of protein (approx-
imately 20 mg) were denatured in SDS containing Laemmli buffer
and separated in 10% SDS-PAGE gels. Proteins were transferred to
polyvinylidene di ﬂuoride membranes (Millipore) in buffer contain-
ing 25 mM Tris, 192 mM glycine, and 20% methanol. The membranes
were blocked with 5% non-fat milk, incubated with a primary anti-
body overnight at 4 /C14C, and then incubated with the horseradish
Table 2. Primers
Forward Reverse
Ihh 5 0 -TTCGGCCGCTGCCAAGACAG-30 50 -GCCACGTGGGTGGAGACAGC-30
Sox9 5 0 -TCCCCGCAACAGATCTCCTA-30 50 -AGGTGGAGTAGAGCCCTGAG-30
Aggrecan 5 0 -CGTTGCAGACCAGGAGCAAT-30 50 -AGGAGTGACAATGCTGCTCA-30
Patch 5 0 -GACCGGCCTTGC CTCAACCC-3 0 50 -CAGGGCGTGAGCGCTGACAA-30
Gli1 5 0 -GAG TGCCATGCCGCAGCAGA-3 0 50 -ACTGGCCCTCCGAGTGACCC-30
Col2a15 0 -GCAGAATGGGCAGAGGTATAA-30 50 -AGTCTGGGTCTTCACAGATAATG-30
ALP 5 0 -AGTCAGGTTGTTCCGATTCA-30 50 -GGGCATTGTGACTACCACTC-30
Runx2 5 0 -AAATTGCAGGCTTCGTGGTTGAGG-30 50 -AATGGCTGTATGGTGAGGCTGGTA-30
Osterix 5 0 -AATCCTATTTGCCGTTTTCC-30 50 -TCTACGAGCAAGGTCTCCAC-30
Osteocalcin 5 0 -GCGCTCTGTCTCTCTGACCT-30 50 -ACCACTCCAGCACAACTCCT-30
Col1a15 0 -GAGGGAGTTTACACGAAGCA-30 50 -AAAGAAGCACGTCTGGTTTG-30
GAPDH 5 0 -TGTGTCCGTCGTGGATCTGA-30 50 -TTGCTGTTGAAGTCGCAGGAG-30
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021 473
peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody
(1:10,000, A-11034, Novex) at room temperature for 1 h. Enhanced
chemiluminescence was performed with Western Bright enhanced
chemiluminescence E(CL )HRP (Biorad). b-actin (1:2,000, sc-
47778, Santa Cruz) was probed as the internal control.
Statistics
All data are presented as the mean ± SD. Bartlett’s test of variance was
performed to determine the appropriate statistical tests. Student ’s
t test was performed for comparisons between two groups, and
one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey ’s multiple comparison test
was performed for grouped samples. The numbers of animals and
experimental repetitions are presented in the ﬁgure legends. The pro-
gram GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA)
was used for these analyses and survival rate analysis. p < 0.05 was
considered to be signi ﬁcant. NS denotes not signi ﬁcant.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.omtm.2021.09.015.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research reported in this publication was supported by the National
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, the National Institute
of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, and National
Institute on Aging, part of the National Institutes of Health,
under award numbers DE023105, AR066101, and AG048388 to Dr.
Shuying Yang. The research sponsored by the Shanghai Sailing Pro-
gram (21YF1436400) and National Natural Science Foundation of
China (82102608) to X.L. X.L. was supported by China Scholarship
Council (CSC) grant 201706260178. The content is solely the respon-
sibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the of ﬁcial
views of the National Institutes of Health. The authors acknowledge
Penn Center for Musculoskeletal Disorders for providing access to
the microCT instrument and software (NIH/NIAMS P30 AR069619).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
X.L. conceived the idea and performed the experiments, interpreted
the data, and wrote the initial draft of the manuscript. Shuting
Yang and Z.C. managed mice colonies and assisted with the experi-
ments. S.Y. supervised the study and revised the manuscript. E.K. pro-
vided critical suggestions and reagents during the study.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
REFERENCES
1. Hellemans, J., Coucke, P.J., Giedion, A., De Paepe, A., Kramer, P., Beemer, F., and
Mortier, G.R. (2003). Homozygous mutations in IHH cause acrocapitofemoral
dysplasia, an autosomal recessive disorder with cone-shaped epiphyses in hands
and hips. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72, 1040– 1046.
2. Liu, M., Wang, X., Cai, Z., Tang, Z., Cao, K., Liang, B., Ren, X., Liu, J.Y., and Wang,
Q.K. (2006). A novel heterozygous mutation in the Indian hedgehog gene (IHH) is
associated with brachydactyly type A1 in a Chinese family. J. Hum. Genet. 51,
727– 731.
3. Ma, G., Yu, J., Xiao, Y., Chan, D., Gao, B., Hu, J., He, Y., Guo, S., Zhou, J., Zhang, L.,
et al. (2011). Indian hedgehog mutations causing brachydactyly type A1 impair
Hedgehog signal transduction at multiple levels. Cell Res. 21, 1343– 1357.
4. Vasques, G.A., Funari, M.F.A., Ferreira, F.M., Aza-Carmona, M., Sentchordi-
Montané, L., Barraza-García, J., Lerario, A.M., Yamamoto, G.L., Naslavsky, M.S.,
Duarte, Y.A.O., et al. (2018). IHH Gene Mutations Causing Short Stature With
Nonspeciﬁc Skeletal Abnormalities and Response to Growth Hormone Therapy.
J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 103, 604– 614.
5. Sentchordi-Montané, L., Benito-Sanz, S., Aza-Carmona, M., Pereda, A., Parrón-
Pajares, M., de la Torre, C., Vasques, G.A., Funari, M.F.A., Travessa, A.M., Dias,
P., et al. (2020). Clinical and Molecular Description of 16 Families With
Heterozygous IHH Variants. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 105, dgaa218.
6. Maeda, Y., Schipani, E., Densmore, M.J., and Lanske, B. (2010). Partial rescue of post-
natal growth plate abnormalities in Ihh mutants by expression of a constitutively
active PTH/PTHrP receptor. Bone 46, 472– 478.
7. St-Jacques, B., Hammerschmidt, M., and McMahon, A.P. (1999). Indian hedgehog
signaling regulates proliferation and differentiation of chondrocytes and is essential
for bone formation. Genes Dev. 13, 2072– 2086.
8. Maeda, Y., Nakamura, E., Nguyen, M.T., Suva, L.J., Swain, F.L., Razzaque, M.S.,
Mackem, S., and Lanske, B. (2007). Indian Hedgehog produced by postnatal chon-
drocytes is essential for maintaining a growth plate and trabecular bone. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 6382– 6387.
9. Gao, B., Hu, J., Stricker, S., Cheung, M., Ma, G., Law, K.F., Witte, F., Briscoe, J.,
Mundlos, S., He, L., et al. (2009). A mutation in Ihh that causes digit abnormalities
alters its signalling capacity and range. Nature 458, 1196– 1200.
10. Long, F., Zhang, X.M., Karp, S., Yang, Y., and McMahon, A.P. (2001). Genetic manip-
ulation of hedgehog signaling in the endochondral skeleton reveals a direct role in the
regulation of chondrocyte proliferation. Development 128, 5099– 5108.
11. Raleigh, D.R., and Reiter, J.F. (2019). Misactivation of Hedgehog signaling causes in-
herited and sporadic cancers. J. Clin. Invest. 129, 465– 475.
12. Epstein, E.H. (2008). Basal cell carcinomas: attack of the hedgehog. Nat. Rev. Cancer
8, 743– 754.
13. Polychronidou, G., Karavasilis, V., Pollack, S.M., Huang, P.H., Lee, A., and Jones, R.L.
(2017). Novel therapeutic approaches in chondrosarcoma. Future Oncol.13,6 3 7– 648.
14. Italiano, A., Le Cesne, A., Bellera, C., Piperno-Neumann, S., Duffaud, F., Penel, N.,
Cassier, P., Domont, J., Takebe, N., Kind, M., et al. (2013). GDC-0449 in patients with
advanced chondrosarcomas: a French Sarcoma Group/US and French National
Cancer Institute Single-Arm Phase II Collaborative Study. Ann. Oncol.24,2 9 2 2– 2926.
15. Gerling, M., Büller, N.V., Kirn, L.M., Joost, S., Frings, O., Englert, B., Bergström, Å.,
Kuiper, R.V., Blaas, L., Wielenga, M.C., et al. (2016). Stromal Hedgehog signalling is
downregulated in colon cancer and its restoration restrains tumour growth. Nat.
Commun. 7, 12321.
16. Bale, A.E. (2002). Hedgehog signaling and human disease. Annu. Rev. Genomics
Hum. Genet. 3,4 7– 65.
17. Yuan, X., and Yang, S. (2015). Cilia/Ift protein and motor -related bone diseases and
mouse models. Front. Biosci. 20, 515– 555.
18. Kurio, N., Saunders, C., Bechtold, T.E., Salhab, I., Nah, H.D., Sinha, S., Billings, P.C.,
Paciﬁci, M., and Koyama, E. (2018). Roles of Ihh signaling in chondroprogenitor
function in postnatal condylar cartilage. Matrix Biol. 67,1 5– 31.
19. Das, I., Park, J.M., Shin, J.H., Jeon, S.K., Lorenzi, H., Linden, D.J., Worley, P.F., and
Reeves, R.H. (2013). Hedgehog agonist therapy corrects structural and cognitive def-
icits in a Down syndrome mouse model. Sci. Transl. Med. 5, 201ra120.
20. Heine, V.M., Griveau, A., Chapin, C., Ballard, P.L., Chen, J.K., and Rowitch, D.H.
(2011). A small-molecule smoothened agonist prevents glucocorticoid-induced
neonatal cerebellar injury. Sci. Transl. Med. 3, 105ra104.
21. Ono, N., Ono, W., Nagasawa, T., and Kronenberg, H.M. (2014). A subset of chondro-
genic cells provides early mesenchymal progenitors in growing bones. Nat. Cell Biol.
16, 1157– 1167.
22. Bangs, F., and Anderson, K.V. (2017). Primary Cilia and Mammalian Hedgehog
Signaling. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 9, a028175.
23. Li, X., Yang, S., Deepak, V., Chinipardaz, Z., and Yang, S. (2021). Identi ﬁcation of
Cilia in Different Mouse Tissues. Cells 10, 1623.
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development
474 Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021
24. Walden, M.J., Murphey, M.D., and Vidal, J.A. (2008). Incidental enchondromas of
the knee. AJR Am. J. Roentgenol. 190, 1611– 1615.
25. McFarlane, J., Knight, T., Sinha, A., Cole, T., Kiely, N., and Freeman, R. (2016).
Exostoses, enchondromatosis and metachondromatosis; diagnosis and management.
Acta Orthop. Belg. 82, 102– 105.
26. Cantley, L., Saunders, C., Guttenberg, M., Candela, M.E., Ohta, Y., Yasuhara, R.,
Kondo, N., Sgariglia, F., Asai, S., Zhang, X., et al. (2013). Loss of b-catenin induces
multifocal periosteal chondroma-like masses in mice. Am. J. Pathol. 182, 917– 927.
27. Hopyan, S., Gokgoz, N., Poon, R., Gensure, R.C., Yu, C., Cole, W.G., Bell, R.S.,
Jüppner, H., Andrulis, I.L., Wunder, J.S., and Alman, B.A. (2002). A mutant PTH/
PTHrP type I receptor in enchondromatosis. Nat. Genet. 30, 306– 310.
28. Weiner, S.D. (2004). Enchondroma and chondrosarcoma of bone: clinical, radiologic,
and histologic differentiation. Instr. Course Lect. 53, 645– 649.
29. Shariat Torbaghan, S., Ashouri, M., Jalayer Naderi, N., and Baherini, N. (2011).
Histopathologic Differentiation between Enchondroma and Well-differentiated
Chondrosarcoma: Evaluating the Ef ﬁcacy of Diagnostic Histologic Structures.
J. Dent. Res. Dent. Clin. Dent. Prospect. 5,9 8– 101.
30. Yang, J., Andre, P., Ye, L., and Yang, Y.Z. (2015). The Hedgehog signalling pathway in
bone formation. Int. J. Oral Sci. 7,7 3– 79.
31. Long, F., Joeng, K.S., Xuan, S., Efstratiadis, A., and McMahon, A.P. (2006). Independent
regulation of skeletal growth by Ihh and IGF signaling. Dev. Biol.298,3 2 7– 333.
32. Wu, Q., Chen, D., Zuscik, M.J., O’Keefe, R.J., and Rosier, R.N. (2008). Overexpression
of Smurf2 stimulates endochondral ossiﬁcation through upregulation of beta-catenin.
J. Bone Miner. Res. 23, 552– 563.
33. Long, F., Chung, U.I., Ohba, S., McMahon, J., Kronenberg, H.M., and McMahon, A.P.
(2004). Ihh signaling is directly required for the osteoblast lineage in the endochon-
dral skeleton. Development 131, 1309– 1318.
34. Long, F., and Ornitz, D.M. (2013). Development of the endochondral skeleton. Cold
Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 5, a008334.
35. Enomoto-Iwamoto, M., Nakamura, T., Aikawa, T., Higuchi, Y., Yuasa, T.,
Yamaguchi, A., Nohno, T., Noji, S., Matsuya, T., Kurisu, K., et al. (2000).
Hedgehog proteins stimulate chondrogenic cell differentiation and cartilage forma-
tion. J. Bone Miner. Res. 15, 1659– 1668.
36. Shi, Y., He, G., Lee, W.C., McKenzie, J.A., Silva, M.J., and Long, F. (2017). Gli1 identiﬁes
osteogenic progenitors for bone formation and fracture repair. Nat. Commun.8,2 0 4 3.
37. Frank-Kamenetsky, M., Zhang, X.M., Bottega, S., Guicherit, O., Wichterle, H., Dudek,
H., Bumcrot, D., Wang, F.Y., Jones, S., Shulok, J., et al. (2002). Small-molecule mod-
ulators of Hedgehog signaling: identiﬁcation and characterization of Smoothened ag-
onists and antagonists. J. Biol. 1,1 0.
38. Bosakova, M., Abraham, S.P., Nita, A., Hruba, E., Buchtova, M., Taylor, S.P., Duran,
I., Martin, J., Svozilova, K., Barta, T., et al.; University of Washington Center for
Mendelian Genomics (2020). Mutations in GRK2 cause Jeune syndrome by impair-
ing Hedgehog and canonical Wnt signaling. EMBO Mol. Med. 12, e11739.
39. de Andrea, C.E., Wiweger, M., Prins, F., Bovée, J.V., Romeo, S., and Hogendoorn, P.C.
(2010). Primary cilia organization reﬂects polarity in the growth plate and implies loss
of polarity and mosaicism in osteochondroma. Lab. Invest. 90, 1091– 1101.
40. Liu, H., Kiseleva, A.A., and Golemis, E.A. (2018). Ciliary signalling in cancer. Nat.
Rev. Cancer 18, 511– 524.
41. Ho, L., Ali, S.A., Al-Jazrawe, M., Kandel, R., Wunder, J.S., and Alman, B.A. (2013).
Primary cilia attenuate hedgehog signalling in neoplastic chondrocytes. Oncogene
32, 5388– 5396.
42. Wang, Y., Arvanites, A.C., Davidow, L., Blanchard, J., Lam, K., Yoo, J.W., Coy, S.,
Rubin, L.L., and McMahon, A.P. (2012). Selective identiﬁcation of hedgehog pathway
antagonists by direct analysis of smoothened ciliary translocation. ACS Chem. Biol. 7,
1040– 1048.
43. Wang, Y., Zhou, Z., Walsh, C.T., and McMahon, A.P. (2009). Selective translocation
of intracellular Smoothened to the primary cilium in response to Hedgehog pathway
modulation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 2623– 2628.
44. Lim, J., Li, X., Yuan, X., Yang, S., Han, L., and Yang, S. (2020). Primary cilia control
cell alignment and patterning in bone development via ceramide-PKC z-b-catenin
signaling. Commun. Biol. 3,4 5.
45. Hynes, A.M., Giles, R.H., Srivastava, S., Eley, L., Whitehead, J., Danilenko, M.,
Raman, S., Slaats, G.G., Colville, J.G., Ajzenberg, H., et al. (2014). Murine Joubert syn-
drome reveals Hedgehog signaling defects as a potential therapeutic target for neph-
ronophthisis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 9893– 9898.
46. Corbit, K.C., Aanstad, P., Singla, V., Norman, A.R., Stainier, D.Y., and Reiter, J.F. (2005).
Vertebrate Smoothened functions at the primary cilium. Nature 437,1 0 1 8– 1021.
47. Kashiwagi, M., Hojo, H., Kitaura, Y., Maeda, Y., Aini, H., Takato, T., Chung, U.I., and
Ohba, S. (2016). Local administration of a hedgehog agonist accelerates fracture heal-
ing in a mouse model. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 479, 772– 778.
48. Briscoe, J., and Thérond, P.P. (2013). The mechanisms of Hedgehog signalling and its
roles in development and disease. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 14, 416– 429.
49. Yang, W., Wang, J., Moore, D.C., Liang, H., Dooner, M., Wu, Q., Terek, R., Chen, Q.,
Ehrlich, M.G., Quesenberry, P.J., and Neel, B.G. (2013). Ptpn11 deletion in a novel
progenitor causes metachondromatosis by inducing hedgehog signalling. Nature
499, 491– 495.
50. Skoda, A.M., Simovic, D., Karin, V., Kardum, V., Vranic, S., and Serman, L. (2018).
The role of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in cancer: A comprehensive review.
Bosn. J. Basic Med. Sci. 18,8 – 20.
51. Campbell, V.T., Nadesan, P., Ali, S.A., Wang, C.Y., Whetstone, H., Poon, R., Wei, Q.,
Keilty, J., Proctor, J., Wang, L.W., et al. (2014). Hedgehog pathway inhibition in chon-
drosarcoma using the smoothened inhibitor IPI-926 directly inhibits sarcoma cell
growth. Mol. Cancer Ther. 13, 1259– 1269.
52. Xiang, W., Jiang, T., Guo, F., Gong, C., Yang, K., Wu, Y., Huang, X., Cheng, W., and
Xu, K. (2014). Hedgehog pathway inhibitor-4 suppresses malignant properties of
chondrosarcoma cells by disturbing tumor ciliogenesis. Oncol. Rep. 32, 1622– 1630.
53. Sun, Y., Guo, W., Ren, T., Liang, W., Zhou, W., Lu, Q., Jiao, G., and Yan, T. (2014).
Gli1 inhibition suppressed cell growth and cell cycle progression and induced
apoptosis as well as autophagy depending on ERK1/2 activity in human chondrosar-
coma cells. Cell Death Dis. 5, e979.
54. Rozeman, L.B., Hameetman, L., Cleton-Jansen, A.M., Taminiau, A.H., Hogendoorn,
P.C., and Bovée, J.V. (2005). Absence of IHH and retention of PTHrP signalling in
enchondromas and central chondrosarcomas. J. Pathol. 205, 476– 482.
55. Madisen, L., Zwingman, T.A., Sunkin, S.M., Oh, S.W., Zariwala, H.A., Gu, H., Ng,
L.L., Palmiter, R.D., Hawrylycz, M.J., Jones, A.R., et al. (2010). A robust and high-
throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the whole mouse brain.
Nat. Neurosci. 13, 133– 140.
56. Voehringer, D., Liang, H.E., and Locksley, R.M. (2008). Homeostasis and effector
function of lymphopenia-induced “memory-like” T cells in constitutively T cell-
depleted mice. J. Immunol. 180, 4742– 4753.
57. Yuan, X., and Yang, S. (2015). Deletion of IFT80 Impairs Epiphyseal and Articular
Cartilage Formation Due to Disruption of Chondrocyte Differentiation. PLoS ONE
10, e0130618.
58. Li, X., Yang, S., Han, L., Mao, K., and Yang, S. (2020). Ciliary IFT80 is essential for
intervertebral disc development and maintenance. FASEB J. 34, 6741– 6756.
59. Yuan, X., Cao, J., He, X., Serra, R., Qu, J., Cao, X., and Yang, S. (2016). Ciliary IFT80
balances canonical versus non-canonical hedgehog signalling for osteoblast differen-
tiation. Nat. Commun. 7, 11024.
60. Liu, M., Alharbi, M., Graves, D., and Yang, S. (2020). IFT80 Is Required for Fracture
Healing Through Controlling the Regulation of TGF- b Signaling in Chondrocyte
Differentiation and Function. J. Bone Miner. Res. 35, 571– 582.
61. Jonason, J.H., Hoak, D., and O ’Keefe, R.J. (2015). Primary murine growth plate and
articular chondrocyte isolation and cell culture. Methods Mol. Biol. 1226,1 1– 18.
62. Sun, J., Wei, X., Li, S., Sun, C., Wang, C., Li, P., Wei, D.L., and Wei, L. (2018). The
Effects of Indian Hedgehog Deletion on Mesenchyme Cells: Inducing Intermediate
Cartilage Scaffold Ossi ﬁcation to Cause Growth Plate and Phalange Joint Absence,
Short Limb, and Dwar ﬁsh Phenotypes. Stem Cells Dev. 27, 1412– 1425.
63. Li, Z., Liu, T., Gilmore, A., Gómez, N.M., Fu, C., Lim, J., Yang, S., Mitchell, C.H., Li,
Y.P., Oursler, M.J., and Yang, S. (2019). Regulator of G Protein Signaling Protein 12
(Rgs12) Controls Mouse Osteoblast Differentiation via Calcium Channel/Oscillation
and Gai-ERK Signaling. J. Bone Miner. Res. 34, 752– 764.
www.moleculartherapy.org
Molecular Therapy: Methods & Clinical Development Vol. 23 December 2021 475