Local administration of a hedgehog agonist accelerates fracture
healing in a mouse model
Miki Kashiwagi a, b, Hironori Hojo c, Yoshiaki Kitaura b, c, Yujiro Maeda c, Hailati Aini c,
Tsuyoshi Takato a, Ung-il Chung b, c, Shinsuke Ohba b, c, *
a Department of Sensory and Motor System Medicine, The University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 1 13-0033, Japan
b Division of Clinical Biotechnology, The University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 1 13-0033, Japan
c Department of Bioengineering, The University of Tokyo Graduate School of Engineering, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 1 13-8656, Japan
article info
Article history:
Received 15 September 2016
Accepted 26 September 2016
Available online xxx
Keywords:
Hedgehog
Smoothened agonist
Bone fracture healing
Callus formation
Chondrocyte
Osteoblast
abstract
Bone fracture healing is processed through multiple biological stages including the transition from
cartilaginous callus to bony callus formation. Because of its speci ﬁc, temporal and indispensable func-
tions demonstrated by mouse genetic studies, Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is one of the most potent
signaling pathways involved in these processes, but the effect of Hh-signaling activation by small
compounds on the repair process had not yet been addressed. Here we examined therapeutic effects of
local and one shot-administration of the Hh agonist known as smoothened agonist (SAG) on bone
fracture healing in a mouse model. A quantitative analysis with three-dimensional micro-computed
tomography showed that SAG administration increased the size of both the cartilaginous callus and bony
callus at 14 days after the surgery. A histological analysis showed that SAG administration increased the
number of cells expressing a proliferation marker and a chondrocyte marker in cartilaginous callus as
well as the cells expressing an osteoblast marker in bony callus. These results indicate that the SAG
administration resulted in an enhancement of callus formation during bone fracture healing, which is at
least in part mediated by an increase in chondrocyte proliferation in cartilaginous callus and the pro-
motion of bone formation in bony callus. Therapeutic strategies with a SAG-mediated protocol may thus
be useful for the treatment of bone fractures.
© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Bone fractures are common among humans, and they under-
mine one's quality of life. Although the human body's repair of a
bone fracture is well-orchestrated through multiple regenerative
processes, effective therapeutic strategies remain to be developed
due to complexity of the fracture repair processes, which involve
multiple cell types. The use of the accumulated knowledge about
embryonic development is a reasonable approach for designing
therapeutic strategies for the regeneration of tissues such as bone,
because common features are observed in many contexts between
development and regeneration [1].
A greater understanding of bone development will provide in-
sights into therapeutic strategies for bone fracture healing. The
processes of bone healing seem to partly mimic those of endo-
chondral ossi ﬁcation in development [1]. During endochondral
ossiﬁcation, skeletal progenitors are initially condensed and sub-
sequently differentiate into chondrocytes to form cartilage. This
cartilage is used as a mold which undergoes a cartilage-directed
ossiﬁcation. Similarly, key features of bone fracture healing are
the formation of a cartilaginous callus followed by mineralization
and replacement with bone. The healing process is likely regulated
by a large number of factors, as bone development is. Several fac-
tors have been implicated in the healing process, including bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) [2], ﬁbroblast growth factors
(FGFs) [3,4], parathyroid hormone (PTH) [5], PTH-related peptides
(PTHrP) [6], Notch [7], Wnt/b-catenin [8], and hedgehog (Hh) [9,10].
Among these factors, Hh is one of the most potent because of its
speciﬁc, temporal and indispensable function in bone development
[1 1].
Indian hedgehog (Ihh), one of the three ligands of Hh, is highly
expressed in pre-hypertrophic chondrocytes and hypertrophic
* Corresponding author. Department of Bioengineering, The University of Tokyo
Graduate School of Engineering, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 1 13-8656, Japan.
E-mail address: ohba@bioeng.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp (S. Ohba).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com /locate/ybbrc
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.09.134
0006-291X/© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications xxx (2016) 1 e7
Please cite this article in press as: M. Kashiwagi, et al., Local administration of a hedgehog agonist accelerates fracture healing in a mouse model,
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.09.134
chondrocytes, and it acts as an initial switch to specify the skeletal
progenitors to bone-matrix-secreting osteoblasts [12,13]. The
deletion of smoothened (Smo), a transmembrane signaling trans-
ducer for Hh, as well as that of Ihh itself, caused no bone formation
in mice [14]. These mutant mice lacked the expression of Runx2,a
key determinant for osteoblasts, suggesting that the activation of
Hh is required for the speci ﬁcation into Runx2 þ osteoblast pre-
cursors, whereas it is dispensable for the osteoblast maturation
beyond the precursor stage [15].
In addition to the functions of Hh signaling in bone develop-
ment, we and others have revealed the involvement of Hh signaling
in adult bone homeostasis [16e19] and fracture healing [18].W e
conﬁrmed the therapeutic effect of the smoothened agonist (SAG)
on a bone defect model in rat femurs by using arti ﬁcial bones
loaded with SAG [20]. In the present study, we tested an application
of SAG for bone fracture healing in a clinically relevant manner, i.e.,
an injection of SAG in a mouse model. We estimated the bone
fracture healing with qualitative and quantitative methods and
gained molecular-level insight into the therapeutic effects of the
manipulation of Hh signaling on bone fracture healing.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Animals
Eight-week-old male C57BL/6J mice were obtained from Charles
River Japan (Kanagawa, Japan). Seven mice were used for each
experimental group. All experiments were performed in accord
with the protocol approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee
of The University of Tokyo (#KA13-5).
2.2. Reagent preparation
Smoothened agonist (SAG) (566660, Calbiochem, Darmstadt,
Germany) was dissolved in distilled water to make a 100 mM so-
lution. For injection of the SAG solution into the mice, 30 G insulin
syringes (#326638, BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) were used.
Distilled water was used as a vehicle control.
2.3. Fracture model
Eight-week-old C57BL6/J male mice were used for the fracture
model. Each mouse was anesthetized with 3% iso ﬂurane in O 2.
Under a sterilized condition, the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and
fascia in the left limb were incised along the anterior part of the leg,
and the tibia was exposed. A transverse osteotomy was performed
using a diamond cutting disc at the mid-diaphysis as described [18].
The bone marrow cavity of the fractured tibia was internally sta-
bilized by insertion of a 23 G spinal needle (SN-2370, Terumo
Clinical Supply, Kakamigahara, Japan). After irrigation with saline,
the skin was stitched up with 4-0 nylon sutures. On postoperative
day 1 (POD1), 10 mL of the 100 mM SAG solution or vehicle was
slowly injected into the fracture site. On POD 14, the fractured tibiae
were harvested from the euthanized mice.
2.4. Sample preparation
All mice underwent perfusion ﬁxation with 4% para-
formaldehyde under 3% iso ﬂurane anesthesia in O 2. The fractured
tibiae were carefully dissected and additionally ﬁxed in 4%
paraformaldehyde/phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 1 h at 4 /C14 C.
The tibiae were stored in PBS until further processing. Intra-
medullary spinal needles were removed before three-dimensional
micro-computed tomography (3D- mCT) scanning. After the 3-D
mCT scanning, the tibiae were decalci ﬁed with 0.5 M
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) for 21 days. Standard 10-
mm frozen sections were made for immunostaining. The CryoJane
tape-transfer system (39475205, Leica Biosystems, Nussloch, Ger-
many) was used to obtain frozen sections for hematoxylin and
eosin (H &E) and Alcian blue double staining (10- mm thickness).
Parafﬁn sections were prepared for Masson's trichrome staining (8-
mm thickness).
2.5. Radiological analysis
The 3-D mCT scanning was performed using a microfocus X-ray
CT system (SMX-90CT, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) under the following
conditions: tube voltage, 90 kV; tube current, 1 10 mA; and ﬁeld of
view (XY), 13.5 mm. The resolution of one CT slice was 512 /C2 512
pixels. We used the three-dimensional construction software
package TRI/3D-BON (Ratoc System Engineering, Tokyo) for bone
morphometric analysis. The images of callus and bone in Fig. 2 A
were created in a 5 /C2 5 /C2 4-mm cuboid at callus where a fracture
line was adjusted to be centered. Bone area and callus were de ﬁned
as different levels of bone mineral density (BMD) values as
described [21]: BMD value > 700 ¼ bone area; 700 > BMD
value > 350 ¼ highly mineralized callus; 350 > BMD
value > 200 ¼ less mature callus. The following parameters were
quantiﬁed in the de ﬁned callus regions: total callus volume, total
bone volume (BV T), high-density bone volume (BV H), low-density
bone volume (BV L), total bone mineral density (BMD T), highly
mineralized bone density (BMD H), total bone mineral contents
(BMCT), highly mineralized bone mineral contents (BMC H), and
low-density bone mineral contents (BMC L).
2.6. Histological analysis
Vehicle- and SAG-injected samples were stained with H &E and
Alcian blue as described [18]. To assess new bone formation, we
performed Masson's trichrome staining according to the standard
protocol [22]. To detect Sp7 and Sox9 expressions in fractured
tibiae, we performed immunostaining. Brie ﬂy, the sections were
incubated with antibodies against SP7 (1: 2000; ab22552, Abcam,
Cambridge, MA), SOX9 (1: 500; AB5535, Millipore, Bedford, MA),
and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA; 1:1000; 2586s, Cell
Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA) as primary antibodies.
For the Sp7 and Sox9 immunostaining, Anti-Rabbit IgG (H &L)
horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody
(W402B, Promega, Madison, WI) were used as secondary anti-
bodies. For the PCNA immunostaining, the CSAII Biotin-free Tyr-
amide Signal Ampli ﬁcation System (K1497, Dako, Glostrup,
Denmark) was combined with the primary antibody. Antigen-
antibody complex was visualized by diaminobenzodine (DAB),
which gave a brown signal. Methyl green was used for counter-
staining. Histological images were captured by a ﬂuorescence mi-
croscope (BZ-X710, Keyence, Osaka, Japan), and we quanti ﬁed the
immunostaining data by counting stained cells in the middle of the
soft callus (200 /C2 200 mm) using ImageJ software (U.S. National
Institutes of Health, http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/download.html). The
percentage of positive cells was calculated by the number of posi-
tive cells per total cells in the determined area.
2.7. Statistical analysis
Signiﬁcant differences in values were identi ﬁed by Student's t-
test. P-values <0.05 were considered signi ﬁcant.
M. Kashiwagi et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications xxx (2016) 1 e72
Please cite this article in press as: M. Kashiwagi, et al., Local administration of a hedgehog agonist accelerates fracture healing in a mouse model,
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.09.134
3. Results
3.1. The volume and mineral contents of the calluses are increased
by the SAG administration
To examine the effects of the exogenous activation of Hh
signaling on bone fracture healing, we used a mouse tibia fracture
model in combination with the administration of SAG. One day
after the fracture operation (POD1), we administered a one-shot
injection of SAG solution or vehicle into fracture sites, and the
fractured tibiae were harvested on POD 14 ( Fig. 1 A). In gross
appearance shown by the 3-D mCT, the SAG-injected fractured
tibiae tended to show a larger callus than the vehicle-injected tibiae
(Fig. 1B).
We quanti ﬁed the callus formation around the fracture line.
Fig. 2A shows representative pictures of BMD quanti ﬁcation in the
callus visualized by color codes based on the 3D- mCT data. The re-
sults indicated that the SAG-injected group had larger calluses than
the vehicle-injected group; both mineralized tissues and unmin-
eralized tissues were larger in the SAG-injected group.
The quantitative analysis of the 3-D mCT data revealed that the
callus diameter at the fracture line and total callus volume were
signiﬁcantly larger in the SAG-injected group than in the vehicle-
injected group ( Fig. 2 B): an approximately 15% increase in the
callus diameter and a 26% increase in the total callus volume were
observed in the SAG-injected group. All of the parameters tested
for the quality of the calluses, i.e., BV T,B V H,B V L, BMC T, BMC H,
BMCL, BMD T, and BMD H, were all signi ﬁcantly increased in the
SAG-injected group compared to the vehicle-injected group
(Fig. 2 C; see also the Materials and Methods section for detailed
information of each parameter). Thus, the exogenous activation of
Hh signaling on a site afforded by a one-shot SAG administration is
likely to have positive impacts on an early phase of fracture
healing.
3.2. SAG administration increases the number of chondrocytes in
the soft callus
We performed histological analyses to gain molecular-level
insight into the SAG-mediated enhancement of bone fracture
healing. Since the callus size was larger in the SAG-injected group
as shown in Fig. 2 ,w e ﬁrst tested whether cell-types consisting of
the callus were changed by SAG treatment. H &E and Alcian blue
double-staining showed that the area of Alcian blue-positive
cartilaginous tissue was bigger in the SAG-injected group than in
the vehicle-injected group, whereas the cell morphology in the
calluses was similar between the two groups ( Fig. 3A). There were
no signi ﬁcant differences in cell density in the soft calluses of the
two groups ( Fig. 3 B), suggesting that the SAG administration
augmented the cartilaginous callus size without changing the cell
types.
We next analyzed the cell proliferation in the callus by immu-
nostaining with an anti-PCNA antibody. The percentage of PCNA-
positive cells was higher in the SAG-injected group than in the
vehicle-injected group (Fig. 3C and D). To characterize the increased
cells in the soft callus, we further performed immunostaining for
SOX9, a marker for chondrocytes. The number of SOX9-positive
cells was higher in the SAG-injected group than in the vehicle-
injected group ( Fig. 3 E and F). These data suggest that the exoge-
nous activation of Hh signaling increases the callus size at least
partly by accelerating the cell proliferation of the chondrocytes in
the cartilaginous tissues.
3.3. SAG administration accelerates the formation of bony callus
To examine the effects of SAG administration on the formation
of the bony callus, we performed Masson's trichrome staining on
histological sections. The SAG-injected group had thicker miner-
alized bone, which was stained in blue, than the vehicle-injected
group, although the latter had thinner mineralized bone in some
Fig. 1. Scheme of the experimental procedure and gross appearance of fractured tibiae .( A) The experimental procedure. Mice underwent the tibia fracture operation at 8 weeks
of age. On POD 1, vehicle or 10 mLo f1 0 0mM SAG solution were injected into the fracture site of the left tibiae. On POD 14, the fractured tibiae were dissected. ( B) Gross appearance of
tibiae harvested from vehicle-injected and SAG-injected mice.
M. Kashiwagi et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications xxx (2016) 1 e7 3
Please cite this article in press as: M. Kashiwagi, et al., Local administration of a hedgehog agonist accelerates fracture healing in a mouse model,
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.09.134
parts ( Fig. 4 A). Moreover, the immunostaining revealed that the
number of SP7-positive cells was increased in the SAG-injected
group ( Fig. 4 B and C). Thus, an exogenous activation of Hh
signaling at an early phase of fracture healing contributes to bone
healing through the acceleration of bony callus formation as well as
cartilaginous callus formation.
4. Discussion
We obtained two major ﬁndings: (1) the local administration of
SAG augmented the callus formation in a mouse fracture model,
and (2) the effect was accompanied by an increase in chondrocyte
proliferation in the soft callus and the promotion of bone formation
in the bony callus.
Bone fracture healing has two processes after the in ﬂammation
stage: intramembranous ossi ﬁcation and endochondral ossi ﬁca-
tion. Intramembranous ossi ﬁcation is a direct bone formation
process, whereas endochondral ossi ﬁcation is indirect bone for-
mation via chondrogenesis. Ihh has been shown to be expressed in
prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes in the callus dur-
ing fracture healing [6,23], as it is during endochondral ossi ﬁcation
in skeletal development [24,25]. Several mouse genetic studies
Fig. 2. Radiological ﬁndings of callus formation in vehicle-injected and SAG-injected mice on POD14 .( A) Representative images obtained by 3D- mCT of fractured tibiae in
vehicle-injected and SAG-injected mice. Lateral view and sagittally sectioned images are shown. Color-mapped images were created with BMD values. Bars, 2 mm. ( B) Comparison
of callus size. The callus diameter of the tibiae at the fractured line and total tissue volume were calculated using sectional images. Data are means ± SDs of seven mice per each
group. *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 vs. vehicle. ( C) Histomorphometric analyses of 3D- mCT data. BV, bone volume; BMC; bone mineral contents; BMD, bone mineral density. Data are
means ± SDs of seven mice per each group. *p < 0.05 vs. vehicle. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this
article.)
M. Kashiwagi et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications xxx (2016) 1 e74
Please cite this article in press as: M. Kashiwagi, et al., Local administration of a hedgehog agonist accelerates fracture healing in a mouse model,
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.09.134
have shown that Hh signaling positively regulates fracture healing.
In our previous study, haploinsuf ﬁciency of Gli1, a transcriptional
activator of Hh signaling, resulted in a smaller size of callus
compared to the wild type in a mouse fracture model [18]. The loss
of Hh signaling by deleting Smo reduced the cell proliferation
around hypertrophic chondrocytes, osteoblast differentiation, and
callus formation in a segmental bone graft transplantation model
[10]. In addition, other studies have revealed effects of the small
molecule-mediated manipulation of Hh signaling on skeletal defect
healing. Hh inhibitor GDC-0449 reduced bone volume and bone
mineral density and also downregulated SP7 expression in a rat
stress fracture healing model [26]. On the other hand, a small
compound (Oxy133) activating the Hh signaling pathway induced
osteogenic differentiation in cell culture and stimulated bone for-
mation in a rat spinal fusion model [27]. In line with these studies,
our present data showed that the local administration of SAG
signiﬁcantly increased both the less mature callus (soft callus) and
the highly mineralized callus (bony callus).
Our analyses further identi ﬁed potential mechanisms underly-
ing the therapeutic effects of SAG administration on fracture
healing. As our data support an increased proliferation of Sox9-
positive chondrocytes in the soft callus of the SAG-injected group,
Fig. 3. Histological ﬁndings of soft callus in vehicle-injected and SAG-injected tibiae .( A) Representative images of H &E and Alcian blue double staining of callus sections of
vehicle-injected and SAG-injected tibiae on POD14. Bars, 200 mm. (B) Calculated cell density in the soft callus of vehicle-injected and SAG-injected tibiae on sections in (A). Data are
means ± SDs for the ratio of the number of cells to the unit soft callus area (n ¼ 3). ( C) Representative images of immunostaining for PCNA in vehicle-injected and SAG-injected
tibiae. Bars, 100 mm. (D) Quantiﬁcation of PCNA-positive cells. Data are means ± SDs for the ratio of the number of PCNA-positive cells to total cells. *p < 0.05 vs. vehicle (n ¼ 3). (E)
Representative images of immunostaining for SOX9 in vehicle-injected and SAG-injected tibiae. Bars, 100 mm. (F) Quantiﬁcation of SOX9-positive cells. Data are means ± SDs for the
ratio of the number of SOX9-positive cells to total cells. *p < 0.05 vs. vehicle (n ¼ 3). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article.)
M. Kashiwagi et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications xxx (2016) 1 e7 5
Please cite this article in press as: M. Kashiwagi, et al., Local administration of a hedgehog agonist accelerates fracture healing in a mouse model,
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.09.134
it appears that SAG administration to fracture sites may mimic the
positive effect of Hh on chondrocyte proliferation during bone
development [6]. Thus, the increased cell proliferation in the soft
callus is likely to contribute at least in part to the enlargement of
the soft callus size by SAG administration at an early stage of bone
fracture healing.
Our data also suggest that enhanced bone formation mediates
the therapeutic effects of SAG administration on fracture healing.
Activation of Hh signaling in osteoblasts enhanced the bone frac-
ture healing in a Smo transgenic mice study [28]. Moreover, oste-
oblast proliferation and differentiation were regulated by sonic
hedgehog (SHH) signaling in osteoblasts [29]. Given the require-
ment of Hh signaling for the osteoblast speciﬁcation during skeletal
development (see the Introduction), SAG may act directly on
osteoblast progenitors to induce their differentiation, leading to the
acceleration of bony callus formation supported by the increased
number of Sp7-positive cells within the callus. Another possibility
is that the increased chondrocytes may accelerate bony callus for-
mation via the typical endochondral ossi ﬁcation process or the
transdifferentiation of chondrocytes into osteoblasts, which was
recently reported [30].
In conclusion, the present study's ﬁndings demonstrate that a
local and one-shot injection of SAG resulted in the enhancement of
callus formation during bone fracture healing. The small molecule-
mediated protocol used here may be useful for the treatment of
bone injuries in terms of simplicity of the procedure. In addition,
our ﬁndings suggest the importance of Hh signaling at the initial
stage of fracture healing, which is also supported by the upregu-
lation of Ihh within hours of bone fracture [9] and the peak
expression of Ihh gene at POD1 after meniscus injury [31].H o w -
ever, the present study did not directly address which cells in the
fracture region respond to SAG. To address this question, studies
using mice that are genetically engineered to visualize Hh signaling
activation are needed.
Fig. 4. Histological ﬁndings of the bony callus in the vehicle-injected and SAG-injected tibiae .( A) Representative images of Masson's trichrome staining of callus sections of
vehicle-injected and SAG-injected tibiae on POD14. Bones are stained in blue, and cartilages are in light blue. Arrowheads indicate thinner mineral ized bone. Bars, 200 mm. ( B)
Representative images of immunostaining for SP7 in vehicle-injected and SAG-injected tibiae. Bars, 100 mm. (C) Quanti ﬁcation of SP7-positive cells. Data are means ± SDs for the
ratio of the number of SP7-positive cells to total cells. **p < 0.01 vs. vehicle (n ¼ 3). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article.)
M. Kashiwagi et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications xxx (2016) 1 e76
Please cite this article in press as: M. Kashiwagi, et al., Local administration of a hedgehog agonist accelerates fracture healing in a mouse model,
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.09.134
Conﬂict of interest
All authors declare no con ﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank the members of the Ohba-Chung laboratory
for providing their helpful input, and Katsue Morii, Rie Yonemoto,
and Nozomi Nagumo for providing technical assistance. This work
was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scienti ﬁc Research from the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS; 23689079,
26713054, 15K15732, 24240069, and 2622131 1), JSPS Research
Fellowships for Young Scientists, the Graduate Program for Leaders
in Life Innovation (GPLLI), and the Core-to-Core Program A.
Advanced Research Networks.
Transparency document
Transparency document related to this article can be found
online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.09.134.
References
[1] C. Ferguson, E. Alpern, T. Miclau, J.A. Helms, Does adult fracture repair reca-
pitulate embryonic skeletal formation? Mech. Dev. 87 (1999) 57 e66.
[2] F. Kugimiya, H. Kawaguchi, S. Kamekura, H. Chikuda, S. Ohba, F. Yano,
N. Ogata, T. Katagiri, Y. Harada, Y. Azuma, K. Nakamura, U.I. Chung, Involve-
ment of endogenous bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) 2 and BMP6 in bone
formation, J. Biol. Chem. 280 (2005) 35704 e35712.
[3] H. Kawaguchi, H. Oka, S. Jingushi, T. Izumi, M. Fukunaga, K. Sato, T. Matsushita,
K. Nakamura, A local application of recombinant human ﬁbroblast growth
factor 2 for tibial shaft fractures: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial,
J. Bone Miner. Res. 25 (2010) 2735 e2743.
[4] H. Furuya, Y. Tabata, K. Kaneko, Bone regeneration for murine femur fracture
by gelatin hydrogels incorporating basic ﬁbroblast growth factor with
different release pro ﬁles, Tissue Eng. Part A 20 (2014) 1531 e1541.
[5] G. Holzer, R.J. Majeska, M.W. Lundy, J.R. Hartke, T.A. Einhorn, Parathyroid
hormone enhances fracture healing, A preliminary report, Clin. Orthop. Relat.
Res. 366 (1999) 258 e263.
[6] A. Vortkamp, S. Pathi, G.M. Peretti, E.M. Caruso, D.J. Zaleske, C.J. Tabin, Reca-
pitulation of signals regulating embryonic bone formation during postnatal
growth and in fracture repair, Mech. Dev. 71 (1998) 65 e76.
[7] M.I. Dishowitz, P.L. Mutyaba, J.D. Takacs, A.M. Barr, J.B. Engiles, J. Ahn,
K.D. Hankenson, Systemic inhibition of canonical Notch signaling results in
sustained callus in ﬂammation and alters multiple phases of fracture healing,
PLoS One 8 (2013) e68726 .
[8] Y. Chen, H.C. Whetstone, A.C. Lin, P. Nadesan, Q. Wei, R. Poon, B.A. Alman,
Beta-catenin signaling plays a disparate role in different phases of fracture
repair: implications for therapy to improve bone healing, PLoS Med. 4 (2007)
e249.
[9] H. Ito, H. Akiyama, C. Shigeno, K. Iyama, H. Matsuoka, T. Nakamura, Hedgehog
signaling molecules in bone marrow cells at the initial stage of fracture repair,
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 262 (1999) 443 e451.
[10] Q. Wang, C. Huang, F. Zeng, M. Xue, X. Zhang, Activation of the Hh pathway in
periosteum-derived mesenchymal stem cells induces bone formation in vivo:
implication for postnatal bone repair, Am. J. Pathol. 177 (2010) 3100 e3111.
[11] S. Ohba, Hedgehog signaling in endochondral ossi ﬁcation, J.Dev. Biol. 4 (2016)
20.
[12] S. Ohba, U.I. Chung, PTHrP action on skeletal development: a key for the
controlled growth of endochondral bones, Clin. Rev. Bone Miner. Metab. 12
(2014) 130 e141.
[13] F. Long, Building strong bones: molecular regulation of the osteoblast lineage,
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 13 (2012) 27 e38.
[14] F. Long, U.I. Chung, S. Ohba, J. McMahon, H.M. Kronenberg, A.P. McMahon, Ihh
signaling is directly required for the osteoblast lineage in the endochondral
skeleton, Development 131 (2004) 1309 e1318.
[15] S.J. Rodda, A.P. McMahon, Distinct roles for Hedgehog and canonical Wnt
signaling in speci ﬁcation, differentiation and maintenance of osteoblast pro-
genitors, Development 133 (2006) 3231 e3244.
[16] S. Ohba, H. Kawaguchi, F. Kugimiya, T. Ogasawara, N. Kawamura, T. Saito,
T. Ikeda, K. Fujii, T. Miyajima, A. Kuramochi, T. Miyashita, H. Oda, K. Nakamura,
T. Takato, U.I. Chung, Patched1 haploinsuf ﬁciency increases adult bone mass
and modulates Gli3 repressor activity, Dev. Cell 14 (2008) 689 e699.
[17] K.K. Mak, Y. Bi, C. Wan, P.T. Chuang, T. Clemens, M. Young, Y. Yang, Hedgehog
signaling in mature osteoblasts regulates bone formation and resorption by
controlling PTHrP and RANKL expression, Dev. Cell 14 (2008) 674 e688.
[18] Y. Kitaura, H. Hojo, Y. Komiyama, T. Takato, U.I. Chung, S. Ohba, Gli1 hap-
loinsufﬁciency leads to decreased bone mass with an uncoupling of bone
metabolism in adult mice, PLoS One 9 (2014) e109597 .
[19] K.S. Joeng, F. Long, Constitutive activation of Gli2 impairs bone formation in
postnatal growing mice, PLoS One 8 (2013) e55134 .
[20] Y. Maeda, H. Hojo, N. Shimohata, S. Choi, K. Yamamoto, T. Takato, U.I. Chung,
S. Ohba, Bone healing by sterilizable calcium phosphate tetrapods eluting
osteogenic molecules, Biomaterials 34 (2013) 5530 e5537.
[21] P.K. Suen, Y.X. He, D.H. Chow, L. Huang, C. Li, H.Z. Ke, M.S. Ominsky, L. Qin,
Sclerostin monoclonal antibody enhanced bone fracture healing in an open
osteotomy model in rats, J. Orthop. Res. 32 (2014) 997 e1005.
[22] H. Ogi, K. Suzuki, Y. Ogino, M. Kamimura, M. Miyado, X. Ying, Z. Zhang,
M. Shinohara, Y. Chen, G. Yamada, Ventral abdominal wall dysmorphogenesis
of Msx1/Msx2 double-mutant mice, Anat. Rec. A Discov. Mol. Cell Evol. Biol.
284 (2005) 424 e430.
[23] S. Murakami, M. Noda, Expression of Indian hedgehog during fracture healing
in adult rat femora, Calcif. Tissue Int. 66 (2000) 272 e276.
[24] A. Vortkamp, K. Lee, B. Lanske, G.V. Segre, H.M. Kronenberg, C.J. Tabin,
Regulation of rate of cartilage differentiation by Indian hedgehog and PTH-
related protein, Science 273 (1996) 613 e622.
[25] U.I. Chung, E. Schipani, A.P. McMahon, H.M. Kronenberg, Indian hedgehog
couples chondrogenesis to osteogenesis in endochondral bone development,
J. Clin. Invest. 107 (2001) 295 e304.
[26] N.H. Kazmers, J.A. McKenzie, T.S. Shen, F. Long, M.J. Silva, Hedgehog signaling
mediates woven bone formation and vascularization during stress fracture
healing, Bone 81 (2015) 524 e532.
[27] S.R. Montgomery, T. Nargizyan, V. Meliton, S. Nachtergaele, R. Rohatgi,
F. Stappenbeck, M.E. Jung, J.S. Johnson, B. Aghdasi, H. Tian, G. Weintraub,
H. Inoue, E. Atti, S. Tetradis, R.C. Pereira, A. Hokugo, R. Alobaidaan, Y. Tan,
T.J. Hahn, J.C. Wang, F. Parhami, A novel osteogenic oxysterol compound for
therapeutic development to promote bone growth: activation of hedgehog
signaling and osteogenesis through smoothened binding, J. Bone Miner. Res.
29 (2014) 1872 e1885.
[28] G.S. Baht, D. Silkstone, P. Nadesan, H. Whetstone, B.A. Alman, Activation of
hedgehog signaling during fracture repair enhances osteoblastic-dependent
matrix formation, J. Orthop. Res. 32 (2014) 581 e586.
[29] Y. Horikiri, T. Shimo, N. Kurio, T. Okui, K. Matsumoto, M. Iwamoto, A. Sasaki,
Sonic hedgehog regulates osteoblast function by focal adhesion kinase
signaling in the process of fracture healing, PLoS One 8 (2013) e76785 .
[30] X. Zhou, K. von der Mark, S. Henry, W. Norton, H. Adams, B. de Crombrugghe,
Chondrocytes transdifferentiate into osteoblasts in endochondral bone during
development, postnatal growth and fracture healing in mice, PLoS Genet. 10
(2014) e1004820 .
[31] M. Horie, H. Choi, R.H. Lee, R.L. Reger, J. Ylostalo, T. Muneta, I. Sekiya,
D.J. Prockop, Intra-articular injection of human mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) promote rat meniscal regeneration by being activated to express In-
dian hedgehog that enhances expression of type II collagen, Osteoarthr. Cartil.
20 (2012) 1197 e1207.
M. Kashiwagi et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications xxx (2016) 1 e7 7
Please cite this article in press as: M. Kashiwagi, et al., Local administration of a hedgehog agonist accelerates fracture healing in a mouse model,
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.09.134