OMTM, Volume 23
Supplemental information
SAG therapy restores bone growth and reduces
enchondroma incidence in a model of skeletal
chondrodysplasias caused by Ihh de ﬁciency
Xinhua Li, Shuting Y ang, Zahra Chinipardaz, Eiki Koyama, and Shuying Y ang
1 
 
 
Supplementary figure 1. Ihh deficiency in mice causes human acrocapitofemoral 
dysplasia phenotype 
(A) Representative X-ray analysis of mice at P30. (B) Representative X-ray analysis of 
mice skull and neck at P30. Arrows depict the skull and neck in the control (Left) and 
the mutant mice (Right). (C) Representative X-ray analysis of mice rib cage and spine 
at P30. Arrows depict the wide rib cage in the control (Left) and the narrowed thorax 
and horizon orientated rib in the mutant mice (Right). The normal vertebral in control 
and small and fusion spine in mutant mice  (Right). (D) Representative X-ray analysis 
of mice thorax and spine at P30. Arrows depict the clear boundary of costochondral 
area in the control (Left) and swollen and the structure of fused costochondral area in 
the mutant mice (Right). The normal spine  alignment in control and the fusion of 
vertebral spine in mutant mice (Right). (E) Representative X-ray analysis of mice hand 
2 
 
at P30. Arrows depict the translucency of the growth plates in the control (Left) and the 
fusion of the growth plate in the mutant ulnar and radial (Right). (F) Representative X-
ray analysis of mice hindlimbs at P30. Arrows depict the translucency of the growth 
plates in the control (Left) and the fusion of the growth plate in the mutant proximal 
and distal tibia (Right). (n=8 mice in each group). 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary figure 2. Determine the idea concentration of SAG for 
chondrocyte proliferation 
WST-1 cell proliferation assay of primary chondrocyte culture showed 10nM SAG can 
significant promote the chondrocyte proliferation. (N=3, triplicates per group). All data 
are reported as mean ± s.d. Statistical significance was determined by two-way ANOV A 
and Student's t-test.  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Supplementary figure 3.  Expression of osteogenic genes for mouse chondrocyte 
after culturing for 1, 10 and 21 day  
Realtime RT-qPCR analysis of osterix, ALP, Runx2, Osteocalcin and Col1a1 expression 
levels in the chondrocyte after culturing for 1, 10 and 21 day in osteogenesis media 
(n=3, triplicates per group). All data are reported as mean ± s.d. Statistical significance 
was determined by one -way ANOV A. *P < .05, **P < .01, ***P < .0001. NS=not 
statistically significant. 
4 
 
 
 
Supplementary figure 4. Ihh mutant cannot affect ciliogenesis 
(A) Representative immunofluorescent  staining for acetylated tubulin and DAPI 
showing the cilia length and percentage in cartilage tissues from wild type and vehicle 
treated and SAG treated Ihh deficient mice. Green: Acetylated tubulin, and Blue: DAPI. 
(B) Quantitative measurements of primary cilia length and percentage of (A). (n=3 with 
at least 100 cells analyzed in each group).  
 
5 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary figure 5. Histological evaluation of the organs after SAG 
treatment 
The morphology of spleen, liver, hear, kidney, lung, intestine from P30 old Ihhfl/fl; 
Ihhcko and SAG treated Ihh cko groups under the evaluation of H&E staining. Arrows 
depict the thickness of intestine in different groups. (n=8 mice in each group). 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
Supplementary figure 6. SAG increases the growth of the forelimb’s skeleton in 
Ihh deficient mice 
(A) Radiograph of forelimbs in wild type, vehicle treated, and SAG treated Ihh deficient 
mice. (B-D) Quantity analysis the hummers,radius and ulna length in (A), (n=8 in each 
group).All data are reported as mean ±  s.d. Statistical significance was determined by 
one-way ANOV A. ***P < .0001. NS=not statistically significant. 
 
 
 
Supplementary figure 7. Increased cell proliferation in enchondromas tissues  
7 
 
(A) Representative images of immunofluorescent staining for BrdU and DAPI in 
enchondroma of Ihhcko mice and growth plate tissues of Ihh fl/fl mice. (B) Quantitative 
measurements of percentage of BrdU+ cells in (A), (n=8 mice/group). 
 
 
 
Supplementary figure 8. Hh activity decreased in human enchondroma 
(A) Representative H&E staining images of articular cartilage and enchondroma tissues. 
(B) Immunofluorescent staining for acetylated tubulin and DAPI showing the cilia 
length and percentage in tissues from normal cartilage and enchondroma tissues. Red: 
Acetylated tubulin, and Blue: DAPI. (C) Quantitative measurements of primary cilia 
length and percentage of (B), (n=3 with at least 100 cells analyzed in each group). (D) 
Immunofluorescent staining for Ihh expression in normal articular cartilage and 
enchondroma tissues. Red: Ihh, and Blue: DAPI. (E) Immunofluorescent staining for 
Gli1 expression in normal articular cartilage and enchondroma tissues. Red: Gli1, and 
Blue: DAPI. All data are reported as mean ± s.d. Statistical significance was determined 
by one-way ANOV A. NS=not statistically significant. 
 
8 
 
 
Supplementary figure 9. Ihh are efficient deleted in Ihh mutant mice 
Western blot showed the Ihh are dramatic decreased in Ihh mutant femur at P30 
comparing with control. (n=3 mice/group). 
 
 
 
Supplementary figure 10. A schematic diagram depicts the mechanism of SAG 
restores bone growth caused by Ihh gene mutations 
(A) When Hh existed: ①Hh ligand binds to the ②Ptch receptor, it relieves the 
inhibition of ③Smo. Then, activated Smo blocks the proteolytic truncation of ⑤Gli 
proteins and promotes their dissociation from ④SuFu. Gli-activated (Gli-Act) proteins 
undergo a series of posttranslational modifications and translocate into the nucleus, 
9 
 
where they bind transcriptional co -activators and promote the expression of Hh target 
genes, including gene related with cell proliferation and differentiation. (B) When ① 
Hh mutated: ②Ptch is enriched in cilia and inhibits ③Smo. ④SuFu restrain ⑤Gli 
activity and promote its proteolysis into GLI-Repressor (Gli-Rep). (C)The mechanism 
of SAG rescue Hh activity when Hh mutated: SAG can activate ③Smo and promote 
Smo translocated to cilia. Then, activated Smo promotes the dissociation ④SuFu from 
Gli. Then the Gli get activated (Gli -Act) and ③Gli-Act proteins undergo a series of 
posttranslational modifications and translocate into the nucleus, where they bind 
transcriptional co-activators and promote the expression of Hh target genes. 
 
 