===PAGE 1===
10007
Oral Abstract Session
Erdafitinb in patients with FGFR-altered tumors: Results from the NCI-COG Pediatric MATCH
trial arm B (APEC1621B).
Alice Lee, Alexander J. Chou, P. Mickey Williams, Sinchita Roy-Chowdhuri, David R. Patton,
Brent D. Coffey, Joel M. Reid, Jin Piao, Lauren Saguilig, Todd Allen Alonzo, Stacey L. Berg,
Alok
Jaju,
Elizabeth
Fox,
Douglas
S.
Hawkins,
Margaret
M.
Mooney,
Naoko
Takebe,
James V. Tricoli, Katherine A. Janeway, Nita Seibel, Donald Williams Parsons; Children’s Hospital
at Montefiore, Bronx, NY; Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY; National Cancer Institute Mouse
Cancer Genetics Program, Frederick, MD; MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD; National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD; Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN;
Children’s Oncology Group, Monrovia, CA; Univ of Southern California/Children’s Oncology Group,
Arcadia, CA; Texas Children’s Cancer and Hematology Center, Houston, TX; Ann and Robert H Lurie
Children’s Hospital, Chicago, IL; St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN; Seattle
Children’s Hospital, Seattle, WA; Developmental Therapeutics Clinic, Division of Cancer Treatment
and Diagnosis, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; National Cancer
Institute Center for Bioinformatics, Rockville, MD; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; Cancer
Therapy Evaluation Program, NCI, Bethesda, MD; Texas Children’s Cancer and Hematology Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
Background: The NCI-Children’s Oncology Group (COG) Pediatric Molecular Analysis for Therapy Choice
(MATCH) trial assigns patients aged 1-21 years with relapsed or refractory solid tumors, CNS tumors,
lymphomas, and histiocytic disorders to phase 2 treatment arms of molecularly-targeted therapies
based on genetic alterations in their tumor. Arm B (APEC1621B) evaluated the orally bioavailable
FGFR inhibitor erdafitinib in patients whose tumors harbored activating alterations in FGFR 1/2/3/4.
Methods: Patients received oral erdafitinib 4.7 mg/m2/dose (Max dose: 8 mg) daily for 28-day cycles
until disease progression or drug related dose limiting toxicity (Max 26 cycles). Disease assessments
were performed every 2-3 cycles. The primary endpoint was objective response rate; secondary
endpoints included progression free survival (PFS). Results: A total of 20 evaluable patients (median
age: 15 yrs) were enrolled from June 2018 to July 2022 in this first study of erdafitinib in pediatric
patients. The most common diagnosis (n = 17) was glioma or glioneuronal tumor (11 low grade and 6
high grade). Three patients had non-CNS solid tumors (1 each with neuroblastoma, osteosarcoma, and
rhabdomyosarcoma). FGFR alterations detected consisted of activating hotspot mutations in FGFR1 (n
= 16), FGFR2 (n = 1), FGFR4 (n = 1), and FGFR1 fusions (n = 2; FGFR1:TACC1, FGFR1:TACC3).
Partial responses were confirmed by central review in 2/20 patients (10%, 90%CI: 3.4%, 26.2%), both
with low grade gliomas or glioneuronal tumors (LGG, LGGNT) and FGFR1 hotspot mutations (K687E
and N577K). A best response of stable disease (SD) was observed in 6 additional patients with gliomas
with a median duration of SD of 6.5 cycles. Six-month PFS was 45% (95% CI: 23.1%, 64.7%) and six-
month OS was 89.7% (95%CI: 64.8%, 97.3%). Treatment related adverse events included those
previously reported with FGFR inhibitors including hyperphosphatemia and nail changes or infections.
Grade 1 vision changes were also reported. There was one Grade 3 spinal cord compression and one
Grade 4 intracranial hemorrhage. Conclusions: Erdafitinib was generally well tolerated in this heavily
pre-treated cohort of children with relapsed tumors harboring FGFR alterations. Partial responses or
stable disease were observed in the majority (6/11, 54%) of patients with FGFR1-mutant low grade
gliomas or glioneuronal tumors, suggesting the possible benefit of FGFR inhibitor therapy for these
patients. Further studies would be necessary to more thoroughly evaluate the activity of erdafitinib for
patients with other histologies and FGFR alteration types or combination approaches that include other
targeted and/or cytotoxic agents. Clinical trial information: NCT03210714. Research Sponsor: U.S.
National Institutes of Health.
© 2023 by American Society of Clinical Oncology. Visit meetings.asco.org and search by abstract for disclosure information.
PEDIATRIC ONCOLOGY
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by 70.244.104.57 on August 10, 2026 from 070.244.104.057
Copyright © 2026 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved. 
