Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
Available online 12 December 2023
2590-0064/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Intra-articular administration of PLGA resveratrol sustained-release 
nanoparticles attenuates the development of rat osteoarthritis 
Liwei Wei a,1, Qingqing Pan b,1, Junyan Teng c, Hong Zhang c, Na Qin c,* 
a Department of Sports Medicine, Luoyang Orthopedic-Traumatological Hospital (Orthopedics Hospital of Henan Province), Luoyang, Henan, China 
b The Third Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang Medical University, Institutes of Health Central Plain, Clinical Medical Center of Tissue Engineering and Regeneration, 
Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang, Henan, China 
c Bone Pharmacology Laboratory, Luoyang Orthopedic-Traumatological Hospital (Orthopedics Hospital of Henan Province), Luoyang, Henan, China   
A R T I C L E I N F O  
Keywords: 
Resveratrol 
Nanoparticles 
Osteoarthritis 
Apoptosis 
Autophagy 
A B S T R A C T  
Our previous studies have confirmed that resveratrol (RSV) can prevent the development of osteoarthritis 
through a variety of mechanisms, such as apoptosis inhibition, autophagy induction and SIRT 1 activation. 
However, the pharmaceutical application of RSV is mainly limited by its low bioavailability. Here, we designed 
and synthesized RSV-loaded poly (D, L-lactide-coglycolide acid) (PLGA)-nanoparticles (NPs). The average par­
ticle size, polydispersity index and positive charge of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were 50.40 nm, 0.217 and 12.57 mV, 
respectively. These nanoparticles had marked encapsulation efficiency (92.35 %) and drug loading (15.1 %) for 
RSV. It was found that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs not only inhibited the apoptosis of chondrocytes induced by IL-1, 
but also rescued GAG loss in vitro. Pharmacokinetic data showed that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs demonstrated a 
significantly profound and prolonged concentration profile in joint tissues, with quantifiable RSV concentrations 
over 35 days. The therapeutic effects of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were then examined in rat osteoarthritis models. 
In vitro magnetic resonance imaging results showed that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs treatment dramatically reduced 
both T1ρ and T2 relaxation times at 4, 8, 12 weeks during administration, implying that cartilage destruction was 
alleviated. Histological assessments showed that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs significantly improved osteoarthritis 
symptoms. Gene expression analysis revealed that osteoarthritis mediator genes were downregulated in rats 
treated with RSV-PLGA NPs. Mechanistic studies indicated that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs inhibit apoptosis and 
promote autophagy. Collectively, this study demonstrates that intra-articular delivery of RSV via PLGA NPs 
might be an effective therapeutic approach for osteoarthritis.   
1. Introduction 
Osteoarthritis is a chronic musculoskeletal disease worldwide, which 
affects 18 % women and 10 % men aged 60 years and older [1]. It is 
characterized by the gradual progression of cartilage degeneration, 
subchondral bone stiffness and osteophyte formation, thus resulting in 
joint deformity and stubborn joint pain [2]. Current therapeutic drugs, 
such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), analgesics, and 
intra-articular administration of corticosteroid or hyaluronic acid, can 
relieve the symptoms but not the disease progression. No drugs have 
been approved by the regulatory authorities so far, which require con­
current symptom improvement and structural modification [3]. 
Therefore, discovery of novel therapeutic agents is of great imperative 
for treating and preventing osteoarthritis. 
Numerous in vitro and in vivo experiments show that resveratrol 
(RSV) exhibits protective effects on articular cartilage through various 
mechanisms, such as anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptosis, or direct 
regulation of different signaling pathways or active factors [4]. How­
ever, the bioavailability of RSV is relatively low, owing to its poor 
chemical stability, aqueous solubility and chemical stability [5,6]. There 
are increasing concerns about its low effectiveness caused by its low 
bioavailability and poor stability in vivo after oral ingestion. Hence, the 
local administration of RSV may be more suitable for clinical application 
than systemic administration. It has been previously reported that local 
* Corresponding author. Bone Pharmacology Laboratory, Luoyang Orthopedic-Traumatological Hospital (Orthopedics Hospital of Henan Province), 82, Qiming 
South Road, Luoyang, 471000, Henan, China. 
E-mail address: qinna2001@163.com (N. Qin).   
1 The authors contributed equally. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Materials Today Bio 
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/materials-today-bio 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2023.100884 
Received 13 April 2023; Received in revised form 23 November 2023; Accepted 25 November 2023   
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
2
intra-articular administration of RSV can delay cartilage destruction in 
an osteoarthritis mouse model by inducing autophagy and activating 
SIRT1 though AMPK/mTOR signaling [7,8]. In these two experiments, 
RSV was administered once a week due to fear of joint infection caused 
by frequent intra-articular injections. However, a major limitation of 
these two studies is that the drug pharmacokinetics profile of RSV in 
knee tissues has not been analyzed. It is also uncertain whether the 
effective drug concentration can be maintained within the interval of 
administration because of the short drug half-life. 
Poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles (NPs) can be used 
as an effective drug carrier with high encapsulation efficiency, the 
excellent biocompatibility and stable release performance, therefore 
improving the bioavailability, solubility and stability of the drugs 
[9–11]. In the present study, RSV was incorporated into PLGA, and 
RSV-PLGA NPs were prepared. The elimination and tissue distribution of 
RSV-loaded PLGA NPs in the knee joint of rats were detected, and the 
therapeutic effects on osteoarthritis in vivo was evaluated. 
2. Materials and methods 
2.1. Preparation of RSV-PLGA-NPs 
RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were prepared using the nanoprecipitation 
technique. Trans-resveratrol (MW = 228.24 g/mol) was obtained from 
Solarbio, China. PLGA (lactide: glycolide =
50:50, MW =
30,000–60,000 g/mol) and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) (MW = 72,000 g/ 
mol) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, USA. The main factors of 
microsphere formation, such as the volume ratio of oil phase and water 
phase, concentration of PLGA, and concentration of PVA in water phase, 
were investigated. RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were then prepared by the 
optimized solvent evaporation technique. Briefly, 50 mg of RSV and 
PLGA (w/w = 4:1, 2:1 and 1:1, respectively) were vortexed in acetone 
(2 mL) for complete solubilization to form a primary emulsion (organic 
phase). Next, the primary emulsion was gradually injected into PVA 
solution (10 mL) with varying concentrations (2.5, 5 and 7.5 mg/mL). 
All samples were magnetically stirred for 4 h to make acetone sufficient 
evaporation. After centrifugation (45,000 g, 25 min, 10 ◦C) (Allegra 
64R, Beckman Coulter, USA), the obtained NPs were rinsed with 
deionized water 3 times for nanoparticle separation, followed by 
centrifugation to remove the excess deionized water on the upper layer. 
Lastly, they were frozen in a −80 ◦C freezer and then placed in a vacuum 
freeze-desiccant for lyophilization. RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were obtained 
and stored at 4 ◦C. To optimize the process, a 32-factorial design with 9 
runs was performed according to the ratios of PLGA/RSV (Factor A) and 
concentration of PVA (Factor B) as independent variables. Resveratrol- 
free nanoparticles were similarly prepared as controls. 
2.2. Characterization of RSV-PLGA-NPs 
2.2.1. The particle size and zeta potential 
The particle size and zeta potential of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were 
detected at 25 ◦C using Zetasizer Nano ZS analyzer (Malvern In­
struments Ltd, Malvern, UK) according to the dynamic light scattering 
and electrophoretic mobility principles. The freeze-dried RSV-loaded 
PLGA NPs were dissolved with purified water and then performed ul­
trasonic dispersion to obtain a solution of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs with a 
concentration of 0.05 % (wt/v). After 120 s of equilibrium, the sample 
was measured by laser Doppler velocimetry to obtain the zeta potential 
and particle size. The morphological characteristics of RSV-loaded PLGA 
NPs were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Samples 
were first coated with gold via a sputter-coater at 25 ◦C. After gold 
coating of the microsphere samples on a stub, their overall morphology 
was examined SEM (ZEISS Sigma 300). 
2.2.2. Entrapment efficiency and drug loading 
To detect drug encapsulation rate and load efficiency, the 
concentration of RSV in nanospheres was detected by HPLC. Briefly, 5 
mg of lyophilized RSV-containing PLGA NPs are added with 0.5 mL of 
dichloromethane and vortexed to disrupt the structure of the spheroids, 
resulting in complete release of the drug. After adding 10 mL of meth­
anol, centrifuge the samples at 12,000 g for 20 min at 4 ◦C. Then, the 
supernatant (20 μL) is taken into the column for determination. Cali­
bration curve of the methanol solution using RSV (standard solution in 
the range of 0.5–20 μg/mL; R2 = 0.9961) to calculate the RSV content in 
the corresponding sample. Entrapment rate = Actual DL/Theoretical DL 
× 100 %; DL = Actual drug content in microspheres/Total weight of 
lyophilized microspheres × 100 %. 
2.2.2.1. HPLC method validation. According to internationally accepted 
guidelines ((ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline), the proposed HPLC 
procedure was validated (Fig. S1). 
2.2.2.2. Linearity. A good linear relationship was obtained with six 
concentrations (0.5, 1.00, 5.00, 10.00, 15.00, 20.00 μg/mL) of resver­
atrol standards in three injections over 3 days. Each peak area vs. con­
centration and linearity is plotted by least squares regression analysis. 
2.2.2.3. Limit of detection and limit of quantification. The signal-to-noise 
ratio (S/N) method was used to calculate the limit of detection (LOD) 
and limit of quantification (LOQ). A concentration equal to 3 is LOD, and 
a concentration equal to 10 is LOQ. Within 3 days, the resveratrol test 
solution is injected into the system in triplicate. 
2.2.2.4. Precision of method. Intraday and interday precision was used, 
and the resveratrol test solution was injected 3 times for 3 consecutive 
days, and the concentration of the injected solution was determined as 
the low, medium, and high level of the calibration curve. 
2.2.2.5. Accuracy of method. The accuracy of HPLC method was 
determined at 80 %, 100 % and 120 % by standard addition method. 
Add a known amount of resveratrol to the pre-analyzed nanoparticle 
sample solution and repeat 3 times per level. 
2.2.2.6. Robustness of method. In order to assess the robustness of the 
method, different chromatographic conditions were investigated: flow 
rate, oven temperature and detection wavelength. 
2.2.2.7. Specificity of method. The samples were subjected to stress 
conditions to verify molecular degradation, and the degradation of the 
samples was examined by changing the acid-base environment, thermal 
environment and light conditions. 
2.2.3. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy of RSV-PLGA-NPs 
The infrared spectra of RSV, PLGA-NPs and RSV-PLGA-NPs in the 
band of 4000–500 cm−1 were detected by infrared absorption spec­
trometry (Bruker, Tensor II, Germany). 
2.2.4. Differential scanning calorimetry of RSV-PLGA-NPs 
DSC instrumentation (Perkin Elmer, USA) was used for RSV-PLGA- 
NPs perform differential scanning calorimetry. 
2.2.5. Degradation assay in vitro of RSV-PLGA-NPs 
RSV-PLGA-NPs were dispersed in pH 7.4 and 6.4 PBS, respectively. 
In vitro degradation kinetics are performed at 37 ◦C in a shaker at 200 
rpm. The pH of the sample is determined daily with a pH meter. The 
RSV-PLGA-NPs were then dispersed in the culture medium, the simu­
lated body fluid was changed every day, and the lyophilized was taken 
out for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) at 14 and 28 days to eval­
uate the degradation of microspheres. 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
3
2.2.6. Release test of resveratrol from RSV-PLGA-NPs 
To mimic the acidic environment of osteoarthritis and the release of 
drugs under normal physiological conditions, The drug release of RSV- 
loaded PLGA NPs was studied in PBS (pH 7.4 and pH 6.4) (contains 
0.5 % Tween 80) using the dialysis bag (MW: 3500 KD) method as re­
ported previously [12]. Approximately 6 mg of the sample was placed in 
a dialysis bag, which was then placed in a PBS solution. The beaker 
containing the dialysis bag was placed in a shaker (Yiheng, THZ-98A, 
China) at 37 ◦C and 100 rpm/min, a certain amount of dialysate was 
taken out every day according to the predetermined time point, and then 
supplemented with fresh dialysate of equal volume, and the concen­
tration of RSV was measured by ultraviolet spectrophotometry. Briefly, 
we detected the absorbance value of trans-resveratrol containing liquids 
taken at different time points at 320 nm by ultraviolet spectrophotom­
etry. Then, according to the trans-resveratrol concentration of 0.5, 1.00, 
5.00, 10.00, 15.00, 20.00 μg/mL, the absorbance value was determined 
at 320 nm, and the standard curve under different pH conditions was 
drawn with the drug concentration as the abscissa (X) and the absor­
bance value (OD320) as the ordinate (Y) to calculate the RSV content in 
the corresponding release solution. 
cumulative release % = W0/W1 × 100 % 
W0 is the total amount of RSV that had been released in PBS solution 
including being sampled every time point, and W1 is the total amount of 
RSV encapsulated in RSV-PLGA-NPs. 
2.3. Evaluation of biologic activity and cellular internalization of RSV- 
PLGA-NPs 
2.3.1. Cytotoxicity assay 
Normal human knee articular chondrocytes were cultured in α-MEM 
(Gibco, USA) supplemented with 10 % (v/v) FBS (Gibco, USA) and 1 % 
(v/v) penicillin/streptomycin (Solarbio, China) at 37 ◦C and 5 % CO2. 
RSV-loaded PLGA NPs at different concentrations were added into the 
medium to evaluate its cytotoxicity on chondrocytes using the Cell 
Counting Kit-8. Resveratrol-free nanoparticles were used as the control. 
Then, RSV-PLGA-NPs (100 μg/mL) were incubated with chondrocytes 
for 1, 3, and 7 days after screening for suitable concentrations. As 
mentioned above, the CCK-8 kit was used to detect the OD value of each 
group of chondrocytes at 450 nm. 
2.3.2. Live/dead assay 
The chondrocytes were exposed to 1 μL FDA (5 mg/mL stock solution 
in acetone, final amount = 5 μg) and 1 μL PI (5 mg/mL stock solution in 
PBS; Invitrogen, USA) at 37 ◦C for 5 min in the darkness after rinsing 3 
times with PBS. Next, all samples (100 μL) were dispensed in a 96-well 
black plate in triplicate and analyzed with fluorescent microscopy. Live/ 
dead cell ratio was measured as the relative ratio of green/red fluores­
cence units. 
2.3.3. Flow cytometry detection of apoptosis 
Annexin V-FITC-PI kit (4A biotech) was utilized to examine chon­
drocytes apoptosis. Briefly, 1 × 105 cells were collected and suspended 
at 200 μL Binding Buffer. Then, 0.5 mg/mL PI (4 μL) and Annexin V-FITC 
solution (2 μL) were added, followed by incubation at room temperature 
(RT) for 15 min in the darkness. Finally, fluorescence was determined by 
flow cytometry. 
2.3.4. Quantification of intracellular glycosaminoglycan (GAG) 
Chondrocytes were then exposed to IL-1β (10 ng/mL) for 2 h, fol­
lowed by treatment with RSV-loaded PLGA NPs (10 μM). The chondro- 
protective effects of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were assessed by FDA/PI 
live/dead assay, annexin V FITC and PI assay (Clontech, CA) and DMMB 
assay for detecting GAG expression. 
2.3.5. Cellular internalization of RSV-PLGA-NPs 
After co-culture RSV-PLGA-NPs with chondrocytes for 24 h, after 
rinsing the excess nanoparticles with PBS, the uptake of the nano­
particles by chondrocytes was observed by FITC-labeled RSV-PLGA-NPs 
with confocal microscopy. 
2.4. Pharmacokinetics of RSV-PLGA-NPs in vivo 
Thirty male SD rats (weighing 250 g) in this experiment were sup­
plied by the Laboratory Animal Center of Zhengzhou University. All rats 
were maintained in a 12-h day: night cycle at 23 ◦C with unlimited water 
supply. After acclimation to the environmental conditions for 7 days, all 
rats are randomized into two groups, RSV and RSV-PLGA-NPs, respec­
tively, the RSV group rats are treated with a single right knee joint in­
jection of RSV suspension, the RSV-PLGA-NPs group is treated with a 
single right knee joint injection of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs, and 5 mg RSV 
or SV-PLGA-NPs dissolved in a 50 μL volume of dimethyl sulfoxide. 
Blood obtained from orbital vessels and knee tissue specimens were 
obtained to detect the concentrations of RSV in plasma and knee tissues, 
respectively, at the predetermined time after a single intra-articular 
injection. The RSV concentrations were detected by liquid chromatog­
raphy–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) [13]. The pharmacoki­
netic parameters were calculated using the WinNonlin pharmacokinetic 
analysis program (Pharsight, v1.5, USA). Animal experiments were 
approved by experimental animal ethics committee of Luoyang Ortho­
pedic Traumatology Hospital (Orthopedics Hospital of Henan Province) 
(Approval No.: KY2021-006-02). 
2.5. Induction of OA and treatment 
The rat osteoarthritis model was constructed by destabilizing the 
medial meniscus [14]. All rats (n = 40) were randomly divided into 3 
groups as follows: sham surgery (control group), osteoarthritis model 
group (OA group), RSV-loaded PLGA NP treatment group (RSV group). 
Resveratrol (10 μM) dissolved in 0.02 % DMSO (10 μL) was adminis­
tered once four weeks for 12 weeks in the right knee of RSV group after 
DMM surgery. The control and OA groups received 10 μL DMSO (0.02 
%) in the right knee via intra-articular injection as similar to those 
described in RSV group. Following the last Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI) at week 12, all rats were sacrificed and their right knee tissues 
were collected for histological assessment. 
2.6. MRI analysis 
To assess the therapeutic effectiveness of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs, 
three rats were randomly chosen from each group for MRI using a 7 T 
MRI System (MAGNETOM Skyra, Siemens, Germany) 4, 8, 12 weeks 
after surgery. Anesthesia was performed with an isoflurane–oxygen 
mixture through inhalation. A 72-mm i. d. birdcage coil was applied as 
the transmitter coil, and a separate quadrature surface coil (Bruker, 
Ettlingen, Germany) was positioned at the knee joint tissues to reach 
maximum signal reception. All experiments were performed on an Ox­
ford Instruments (Bruker) 200/300 magnet (33-cm clear bore, 4.7 T) 
equipped with a 16-cm i. d. actively-shielded Oxford gradient coil (200 
μs rise time, 18 G/cm). The scanning sequence included SE T1WI (TR/ 
TE = 205 ms/2.5 ms), SE T2WI (TR/TE = 3699 ms/45 ms), GRE T2 × WI 
(TR/TE/turn angle = 408 ms/3.5 ms/30◦). The scanning direction was 
sagittal, the layer thickness was 1 mm, the matrix was 256 × 256, and 
the field of vision was 4 cm × 4 cm–5 cm × 5 cm. During the scanning, 
the rats were anesthetized with isoflurane gas, and the monitoring 
breath was maintained at about 60 times/min. 
2.7. Histologic analysis 
The entire knee joints were removed, and the surface of cartilage was 
photographed using a digital camera. Then, the joint tissues were fixed 
in paraformaldehyde (4 %) in PBS (0.1 M) overnight at 4 ◦C, decalcified 
with 10 % EDTA for 2 weeks, and embedded in paraffin wax. The sample 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
4
from each joint was paraffin-embedded, and cut into 5-mm sections for 
safranin O-fast green and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. The 
severity of osteoarthritis was determined in the medial compartment of 
the tissue sections (n = 5 per mouse) according to the Osteoarthritis 
Research Society International (OARSI) scoring system [15]. Cartilage 
thickness was evaluated by three blinded experts according to a previ­
ously described method [16]. 
2.8. TEM assay 
Specimens from the cartilage from medial femoral condyles were 
fixed in glutaraldehyde (2 %) for 24 h. Then, the samples were cut into 1 
mm3 and postfixed with 1 % OsO4 and embedded in epoxy resin. Next, 
the tissues were sectioned into 80-nm thickness and stained with lead 
citrate and uranyl acetate. Lastly, the ultrathin slides were examined 
using a TEM (Phillips CM-80, Eindhoven, Netherlands). 
2.9. Quantification of sGAG, CTXII, IL-1β, TNF-α 
The urea standardization method was used to determine the dilution 
factor of synovial fluids lavages, and the concentration of each 
biomarker were adjusted based on the dilution factor [17]. SF lavage 
sGAG levels, a marker of proteoglycan turnover, were determined by 
Alcian Blue dye binding assay (Alpco Diagnostics, Windham, NH, USA) 
[18]. The content of GAGs in the sample was determined based on the 
chondroitin sulfate standard curve. The concentration of CTXII, a 
biomarker of collagen II breakdown, in the synovial fluid lavages was 
evaluated with serum preclinical Cartilaps ELISA kits (IDS, The Boldons, 
UK). Meanwhile, the concentrations of TNF-ɑ and IL-1β were detected 
with commercially available ELISA kits (Invitrogen, CA, USA). 
2.10. Real-time PCR 
To further study the impact of resveratrol on the synthesis of extra­
cellular matrix in articular cartilage, SYBR Green real-time PCR was 
conducted to measure the relative gene expression. Total RNA was 
extracted using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). cDNA synthesis was conducted 
using the iScript Reverse Transcriptase kit (Bio-Rad). RNA quantifica­
tion was then carried out on an ABI Prism 7700 system (Applied Bio­
systems) using the LightCycler-FastStart-DNA-Master-SYBR-green-I 
(Takara). The predesigned primer sequences for ADAMTS5, MMP13, 
COL2A1, aggrecan, and GAPDH were synthesized by Takara Bio 
(Table 1). 
2.11. TUNEL assay 
TUNEL assay was carried out with in situ apoptosis detection kit 
(KeyGEN Biotech, Nanjing, China). After digestion with 20 lg/ml pro­
teinase K for 15 min, the serial sagittal sections of cartilage were 
immersed in 3 % H2O2 for 5 min and exposed to terminal deoxy­
nucleotidyl transferase for 1 h at 37 ◦C. Next, the sections were exposed 
to antidigoxigenin-peroxidase antibody for 30 min at 37 ◦C, followed by 
visualization with diaminobenzidine and counterstaining with hema­
toxylin. The chondrocytes with brown nuclei were considered positive. 
The number of TUNEL-positive cells was detected under a fluorescence 
microscope. 
2.12. Immunohistochemistry 
The paraffin-embedded specimens were deparaffinized in xylene, 
followed by rehydration in graded ethanol and water. After rinsing with 
PBS, the sections were inhibited with 5 % serum for 30 min at RT, fol­
lowed by incubation with rabbit anti-LC3 polyclonal antibody (1:50; 
Abgent, CA, USA), anti-P62 polyclonal antibody (1:100; Abgent), or 
anti-caspase 3 polyclonal antibody (1:200; Abgent) overnight at 4 ◦C. 
After rinsing with PBS, the sections were exposed to the secondary 
antibody Alexa Fluor 488 anti-rabbit IgG for 30 min. Lastly, the slides 
were rinsed and mounted with Prolong Gold Antifade Reagent 
(Invitrogen). 
2.13. Statistical analysis 
All values are shown as mean ± standard deviation (SD). All statis­
tical tests were conducted using the SPSS 16.0 statistic software (SPSS 
Inc., IL, USA). Multiple pairwise comparisons were adjusted using 
Bonferroni correction. Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA was employed to deter­
mine differences in OARSI scores and the concentrations of sGAG, CTXII, 
TNF-α and IL-1β, in synovial fluid lavage across treatment groups. The 
MRI variables were examined by two-way ANOVA with repeated mea­
sures to examine intergroup variability over time and between treat­
ment and control groups. Other data were analyzed with one-way 
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison tests (t-test). P-values 
<0.05 (two-tailed) were deemed statistically significant. 
3. Results 
3.1. The properties of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs 
The characteristics of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were determined ac­
cording to the comprehensive investigation results of preparation con­
ditions. The final preparation conditions are as follows: the organic/ 
aqueous phase (volume ratio) is 4:1, the ratio of RSV and PLGA in 
organic phase is 1: 9 (w/w), the concentrations of PLGA and PVA are 
100 mg ml−1 and 3 %, respectively. The average particle size and 
polydispersity index of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were 50.40 nm and 0.217, 
respectively (Fig. 1A). Moreover, the zeta potential of PLGA and RSV- 
loaded PLGA NPs were positively charged at 6.52 ± 0.11 and 12.57 
± 1.32, respectively. The SEM results showed that the microspheres 
were round, regular in shape and uniform in size, and there was no 
adhesion between the microspheres. The particle size is about 50 nm 
(Fig. 1G). Three batches of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were prepared under 
the optimized conditions. HPLC analysis revealed that the average EE 
and DL of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were 92.35 % and 15.1 %, respectively. 
The FTIR spectral characteristics of RSV, RSV-PLGA-NPTs, and PLGA- 
Table 1 
Primer pairs for RT-PCR.  
Gene  
Sequences (5′–3′) 
Product size (bp) 
Accession no. 
COL2A1 
Forward 
AGGGCCAGGATGTCCGGCA 
195 
NM_001844 
GGGTCCCAGGTTCTCCATCT 
Aggrecan 
Forward 
CAACTACCCGGCCATCC 
160 
NM_013227 
GATGGCTCTGTAATGGAACAC 
MMP13 
Forward 
GGAGCATGGCGACTTCTAC 
208 
NM_133530.1 
GAGTGCTCCAGGGTCCTT 
ADAMTS5 
Forward 
GCCAGCGGATGTGTGCAAGC 
130 
NM_198761.1 
ACACTTCCCCCGGACGCAGA 
GAPDH 
Forward 
CCCTCAATGACCGTG 
143 
NM_017008.3 
GGTTTGAGGGCTCTTACTCCT  
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
5
NPs were shown in Fig. 1C. RSV-PLGA-NPs had all the characteristic 
absorption peaks of PLGA-NPs and RSV. Differential scanning calorim­
etry (DSC) results showed that white RSV was completely wrapped in 
PLGA NPs (Fig. 1D). 
The release profiles of RSV from RSV-loaded PLGA NPs are shown in 
Fig. 1F, Fig. S2. To investigate the drug release rate of RSV-loaded PLGA 
NPs in different pH environments, we examined the release profiles of 
RSV in PBS at Ph 7.4 and Ph 6.4, respectively. It was found that low pH 
significantly accelerated the release of RSV (There were two stages of 
drug release in vitro, the first 24 h was in the stage of sudden release, the 
cumulative release of RSV reached 31.64 %, and then entered the stage 
of slow release, the total cumulative release rate reached 52.14 % by the 
10th day. From day 11, RSV-loaded PLGA NPs entered the second rapid 
release period. The cumulative release rate reached 95.45 % within 28 
days.). It is clear that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs are capable of effective and 
sustained drug release under acidic OA conditions. To explore the 
release mechanisms, the release curves were drawn with different 
models. As shown in Fig. S3, the results showed that the release profile of 
RSV-loaded PLGA NPs conformed to the first-order kinetic model (R2 =
0.9951) in vitro, which belonged to the diffusion-controlled release 
process. 
In order to verify the in vitro degradation rate of RSV-PLGA-NPs and 
the change of pH value of RSV-PLGA-NPs in degradation under different 
pH conditions, we performed in vitro degradation experiments. As 
shown in Fig. 1E, acids are generated during degradation to lower the 
pH (Fig. 1E). The SEM results showed that the surface structure of the 
nanoparticles changed when simulating the culture medium for 14 days, 
indicating that the nanoparticles had been mostly degraded, and the 
degradation was basically complete at 28 days (Fig. 1G), which was 
consistent with the results of sustained release of drugs in vitro. 
3.2. Evaluation of biologic activity and cellular internalization of RSV- 
PLGA-NPs 
The chondro-protective effects of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were 
explored. The human osteoarthritis chondrocytes stimulated by IL-1β 
were treated with various concentrations of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs (0, 1, 
5, 10, 30, 60, 90, 120, 150 and 180 μM) for 48 h. As shown in Fig. 2A and 
B, the CCK-8 assay showed that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs could increase the 
viability of chondrocytes in a concentration-dependent fashion, when 
the dose was below 60 μM. In particular, 60 μg/mL of RSV-loaded PLGA 
NPs maximized cell growth compared to IL-1β control (P < 0.001). 
Therefore, the RSV-loaded PLGA NP concentration of 60 μg/mL was 
selected for further analyses. 
The chondro-protective effects of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were veri­
fied by FDA/PI live/dead assays. Notably, IL-1β resulted in a lower 
density of live cells (green) and a greater distribution of dead cells (red) 
in chondrocytes (Fig. 2C). This toxicity of IL-1β can be significantly 
Fig. 1. The characterization of RSV-PLGA-NPs. (A) Frequency and particle size distribution, (B) characterization, (C) FTIR spectra for RSV-PLGA-NPs, (D) DSC, (E) 
Drug cumulative release profile, (F) Degradation in vitro and (G)SEM of degradation in vitro. 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
6
Fig. 2. Evaluation of biologic activity and cellular internalization of RSV-PLGA-NPs. (A–B) CCK assay was to detect the cytotoxicity of RSV-PLGA-NPs. (C) FDA//PI 
stained for cell viability, scale bar: 40 μm. (D) Flow cytometry for cell apoptosis. (E) Quantitative flow cytometry for apoptosis. (F) Quantification of matrix pro­
duction of GAG (n = 6) for cell proliferation. (G) Image of chondrocytes internalizing RSV-PLGA-NPs, scale bar: 20 μm. Values are presented as means ± SD, n = 6. 
*Control versus IL-1β group, # IL-1β versus RSV-PLGA-NPs group. *#P < 0.05, **##P < 0.01. ***###P < 0.001. 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
7
inhibited by 60 μM RSV-loaded PLGA NPs. Flow cytometry was con­
ducted to detect the cyto-protective effects of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs on 
chondrocyte apoptosis. As shown in Fig. 2D, E, a remarkable chon­
drocyte death with an increase level of apoptosis was observed in IL-1β- 
treated chondrocytes. On the contrary, RSV-loaded PLGA NP interven­
tion obviously decreased IL-1β-stimulated chondrocyte apoptosis by 
77.59 %. 
GAGs are responsible for maintaining the integrity of the cartilage 
matrix. Deficiency of GAGs is an early change in osteoarthritis [19]. The 
1,9-dimethylmethylene blue (DMMB) assay was performed to determine 
the effect of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs on GAG expression. As displayed in 
Fig. 2F, a remarkable loss of GAGs was observed in IL-1β-stimulated 
chondrocytes (up to 64.54 %). However, RSV-loaded PLGA NPs could 
rescue IL-1β-stimulated GAG loss by returning it to baseline levels. 
In addition, in order to detect the uptake of nanoparticles in chon­
drocytes, we detected the intracellular fluorescence signal after 24 h of 
co-culture of FITC-labeled RSV-PLGA-NPs with chondrocytes, as shown 
in Fig. 2G, nanoparticles can be uptaken by chondrocytes. 
3.3. Systemic exposure and joint retention of RSV after a single intra- 
articular administration of RSV-PLGA-NPs 
The concentrations of RSV in both plasma and knee joint were 
determined by LC-MS/MS different time points after a single intra- 
articular administration of 5 mg of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs and RSV 
suspension. As shown in Fig. 3A, the plasma concentration of RSV was 
increased rapidly after administration of RSV suspension, reaching 
Cmax value of 6500.2 pg/mL after 4.1 h. This rapid drug efflux from the 
knee joint is consistent with the in vitro release performance, indicating 
that RSV suspension injected into articular cavity could be absorbed 
rapidly and passed through the gap junctions in synovial membranes. 
Upon reaching the peak concentration, the plasma concentration 
decreased rapidly below 300 pg/mL after 72-h administration of RSV 
suspension. On the contrary, the systemic exposure of RSV from RSV- 
loaded PLGA NPs was considerably lower than that of RSV suspension, 
and the duration of quantifiable levels of RSV was longer due to the 
extended release mechanism of the PLGA microsphere. The Cmax value 
of RSV in 12.4 h following intra-articular injection of RSV-loaded PLGA 
NPs was determined to be 1200.5 pg/mL. Then, it began to decline 
gradually, and reached below the limit of quantitation 35 days after 
injection with RSV-loaded PLGA NPs. As demonstrated in Fig. 3B, RSV- 
loaded PLGA NPs markedly decreased the redistribution of dissolved 
and/or micronized compounds into the bloodstream, thus prolonging 
the retention time of RSV in joint tissues. 
In addition, the concentrations of RSV in the knee cartilage samples 
of osteoarthritis rats were assessed (Fig. 3C). After the intra-articular 
administration of RSV suspension, the concentration of RSV in the 
joint tissue was only 856 pg/mL at day 3, and below the lower limit of 
quantification at day 5. On the other hand, RSV-loaded PLGA NPs 
showed a significantly profound and prolonged concentration profile in 
joint tissues compared to RSV suspension, with measurable RSV con­
centrations over 35 days. The concentration of RSV in joint tissues 
reached 120 ng/g at day 3 after intra-articular injection of RSV-loaded 
PLGA NPs. These findings suggest that the retention time of RSV in 
joint tissues is prolonged due to the sustained-release property of RSV- 
loaded PLGA NPs. 
3.4. Effect of RSV-PLGA-NPs on articular cartilage 
Representative T1ρ and T2 maps of the rats knee joints in control, OA 
and RSV-loaded PLGA NPs groups at 4, 8 and 12 weeks during admin­
istration are shown in Fig. 4A. Compared to control group, the T1ρ values 
of OA group were remarkably elevated at week 4 in the medial femoral 
condyle (MFC) (P < 0.05), lateral tibia (LT) and medial tibia (MT) (P <
0.01) and at week 8 in lateral femoral condyle (LFC) (P < 0.05), MFC, 
MT and LT (all P < 0.01). At week 12, the T1ρ values of OA group were 
dramatically higher in MFC, LFC, LT and MT (all P < 0.01). The T1ρ 
values of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs group were obviously reduced 
Fig. 3. RSV concentrations (log-linear scale) of blood plasma and synovial fluid over time following a single intra-articular injection of RSV-PLGA-NPs or RSV.  
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
8
Fig. 4. Representative articular cartilage T1ρ and T2 maps of Control, OA, RSV-PLGA-NPs treated knee joints 4, 8, 12 weeks after RSV-PLGA-NPs treatment. Maps are overlaid on Multi Gradient Echo images (A). The T1ρ 
values of RSV-PLGA-NPs group rats were obviously reduced compared to the OA group at 4 weeks in MT, at 8 weeks in MT, MFC, LFC, and LT and at 12 weeks in MFC, LFC, LT and MT (B). The T2 values of RSV-PLGA- 
NPs treated rats were significantly higher compared to control group in MT and LT at 8 and 12 weeks (C). Results are reported as mean ± SD (n = 5). *Control versus OA group, #OA versus RSV-PLGA-NPs group. *#P <
0.05, **##P < 0.01. 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
9
compared to those of OA group at week 4 in MT (P < 0.05), week 8 in MT 
(P < 0.01), MFC, LFC and LT (all P < 0.05) and week 12 in LFC, MFC, MT 
and LT (all P < 0.01) (Fig. 4B). 
Similarly, the T2 values of OA group were remarkably higher at week 
4 in LT, MT and LFC (all P < 0.05), as well as weeks 8 and 12 in LFC, 
MFC, LT and MT (all P < 0.01) compared to control group. The T2 values 
of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs group were markedly decreased compared to 
OA group at week 8 in MFC (P < 0.01), LFC and MT (all P < 0.01) and at 
week 12 in LT (P < 0.05), MFC, MT and LT (all P < 0.01). The T2 values 
of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs group were dramatically higher than those of 
control group at week 8 and 12 in MT and LT (P < 0.05) (Fig. 4C). 
3.5. Effect of RSV-PLGA-NPs on histomorphology of OA rats 
First, gross morphology of the tibial plateau and femoral condyle was 
observed. As shown in Fig. 5A, the articular cartilage surface of sham- 
operation group was showed an integral, smooth surface with no de­
fects and osteophyte formation, while articular cartilage destruction, as 
characterized by surface erosion, fibrillation, pitting, osteophyte for­
mation, subchondral bone exposure and ulceration, was detected. 
However, injection of RSV nanoparticles significantly reduced cartilage 
damage, and its sliding cartilage surface was similar to that of normal 
cartilage. 
Histopathological analyses by Safranin O-fast green and H&E stain­
ing indicated that normal articular cartilage overlying the cancellous 
bone and subchondral bone plate was observed, of which the superficial 
layers were smooth with integrity. In addition, the chondrocytes were 
arranged in flat and orderly rows, and the cartilage matrix was stained 
with saffron in control group. The OA group demonstrated severe 
pathologic changes, such as clustered chondrocytes, fibrillation and 
fissures, osteophyte proliferation, defects in cartilage superficial zone, 
subchondral trabecular bone loss with the bone marrow spaces occupied 
by synovitis, subchondral bone cyst and fibrous tissue. Compared with 
OA group, RSV group had disorganization and loss of chondrocytes, a 
significant improvement in fissures, an increase in safranin-O unstained 
area and reduced synovitis (Fig. 5B and C). MRI scanning showed the 
number and area of osteophytes increased significantly around the joints 
in OA group (Fig. 5D). In contrast, in the RSV-PLGA-NPs group, the 
number and surface area of osteophytes were less than those in the OA 
group. 
The OARSI score was employed to analyze cartilage destruction, 
osteophyte formation, subchondral bone and synovitis. The median 
OARSI scores in the medial tibial plateau and femoral condyle were 
markedly reduced in RSV group compared with OA group (Fig. 5E). In 
addition, RSV nanoparticles significantly attenuated osteophyte forma­
tion, subchondral plate thickness and synovitis (Fig. 5F,G,H). 
3.6. TEM analysis of chondrocyte morphology 
TEM imaging showed that the normal chondrocytes were round or 
spindle shaped with short microvilli like protrusions extending to the 
cartilage lacuna on the cell surface; the nucleus was slightly round; the 
chromatin was evenly distributed; the cytoplasm was still within free 
ribosomes; the golgi apparatus and microfilaments were observed 
(Fig. 6A, B, C). However, the chondrocytes in OA group had poor 
structure, irregular shape of nucleus, agglutination of chromatin in nu­
cleus, more lipid droplets and focal dissolving areas in cytoplasm, and 
reduced number of other organelles (Fig. 6D, E, F). However, following 
administration of 1000 μg/mL RSV-loaded PLGA NPs, chondrocyte 
nuclei showed more integrity, and the mitochondria were arranged in 
rows with relatively complete structure (Fig. 6G, H, I). The formation of 
autophagic lysosomes was indicated by the arrow. 
3.7. Effects of RSV-PLGA-NPs on expression of catabolic mediators in 
cartilage and levels of GAGs, CTX-II, IL-1β, and TNF-α in the synovial 
fluid lavages from OA rats 
Expression of the catabolic markers MMP13 and ADAMTS-5 in 
cartilage tissue was inhibited by intra-articular administration of RSV- 
loaded PLGA NPs, and the reduced expression of AGG and Col-II in 
articular cartilage was rescued by RSV-loaded PLGA NPs (Fig. 7A). 
At baseline, the synovial lavage concentrations of GAGs, CTX-II, IL- 
1β and TNF-α were no significantly different between the control, OA 
and RSV treatment groups. The synovial lavage levels of GAGs, CTX-II, 
TNF-α and IL-1β were markedly upregulated in OA group compared 
with control group at 12 postoperative weeks. In RSV treatment group, 
GAGs, CTX-II, TNF-α and IL-1β levels were markedly reduced compared 
with OA group at week 12 (Fig. 7B). 
3.8. Effects of RSV-PLGA-NPs on chondrocyte apoptosis and autophagy 
of OA rats 
TUNEL staining results showed that chondrocyte apoptosis was 
induced in the joint tissues of osteoarthritis rats, but blocked by RSV- 
loaded PLGA NPs treatment (Fig. 8A). Furthermore, immunohisto­
chemical analysis indicated that the chondrocytes in OA group had 
higher levels of caspase-3 than control group, implying that osteoar­
thritis could induce chondrocyte apoptosis. RSV-loaded PLGA NPs 
remarkably inhibited overexpression of cleaved caspase-3 (Fig. 8B). It 
was also observed that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs significantly activated 
autophagy, as revealed by the formation of LC3 and degradation of p62 
(Fig. 8C), which is consistent with our previous findings [7]. The above 
results indicated that intra-articular RSV-loaded PLGA NPs could inhibit 
the matrix degrading enzyme activities and chondrocyte apoptosis to 
delay osteoarthritis progression. 
4. Discussion 
In the current study, the effects of intra-articular administration of 
RSV-loaded PLGA NPs on osteoarthritis rats were investigated. PLGA has 
been extensively applied as a drug carrier, owing to its low biodegrad­
ability, biocompatible and systemic toxicity [20]. We first successfully 
synthesized RSV-loaded PLGA NPs and detected the properties and 
biological activity in vitro. The in vitro results showed that RSV-loaded 
PLGA NPs had spherical morphology with a negative charge of 12.57 ±
1.32 mV and a mean size of 50.40 nm. These nanoparticles had signif­
icant EE (92.35 %) and DL (15.1 %) for RSV. The controlled release of 
resveratrol pattern conformed to the first-order kinetic model. The 
synthesized 
RSV-loaded 
PLGA 
NPs 
demonstrated 
significant 
chondro-protective and anti-apoptotic effects on IL-1β stimulation in 
vitro. Besides, in vivo, we found that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs could retain 
in the synovium over a longer period of time, indicating a prolonged 
controlled release of RSV from RSV-loaded PLGA NPs. The imaging and 
histological results of this study confirmed that intra-articular injection 
of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs delayed articular cartilage destruction and 
subchondral trabecular bone changes in osteoarthritis rat model with 
destabilization of the medial meniscus (DMM). Thus, RSV-loaded PLGA 
NPs can serve as a potential intra-articular drug delivery system for 
preventing joint deterioration during osteoarthritis. 
Considering that the joint has low bioavailability for systemic 
administration and rapidly eliminates drugs following intra-articular 
administration, it still remains a challenge for drug delivery. Nano­
particles can overcome the challenges of intra-articular drug delivery, as 
they improve biodistribution and drug residence time in the joint, and 
have the capacity to penetrate extracellular matrix and cell barriers, thus 
affecting the localization of drugs within specific joint tissues [21]. 
Although several physical parameters have been proposed for cartilage 
matrix structure and pore size, controversial results have been published 
regarding the threshold size of nanoparticles, which can prohibit matrix 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
10
Fig. 5. RSV-PLGA-NPs intra-articular injection attenuate cartilage degeneration in OA model rats assessed by histological evaluations. (A) Gross images of the femoral condyle. (B) Safranin-O/Fast green staining of the 
joints. 50 × magnification (C) Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the synovium. 50 × magnification. (D) MRI scans of knee joint; there were bigger osteophyte formation around the joints in the OA group. (E) OARSI 
scores of articular cartilage. (F) subchondral plate thickness. (G) synovitis scores. (H) osteophyte size. All data represent mean ± SD (n = 5). *Control versus OA group, #OA versus RSV-PLGA-NPs group. *#P < 0.05, 
**##P < 0.01. 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
11
penetration. Previous research has suggested that nanoparticles (~55 
nm) can penetrate through the full-thickness cartilage [22]. An abun­
dance of extracellular matrix in avascular cartilage may hinder drug 
penetration, and the NPs (30–50 nm) can be taken up by cells and 
retained in the joint [23]. In our study, RSV-loaded PLGA NPs with a 
mean size of 50.40 nm had excellent properties within this optimal 
nanoparticle size range. Apart from particle size, the particle charge is a 
factor that affects the penetration and retention of cartilage matrix [24]. 
Another passive targeting strategy for cartilage is the intentional control 
over nanoparticles’ zeta potential. The dense network of sulfated pro­
teoglycans provides a bulk anionic charge to the cartilage [25,26], 
which corresponds to a proteoglycan level or fixed charge density of 
−158 to −182 mM in human articular cartilage [27]. Positively charged 
drug carriers demonstrated higher uptake and faster penetration than 
their neutral same-sized counterparts [28]. The RSV-loaded PLGA NPs 
synthesized in this study displayed positive zeta potential values, which 
could promote their prolonged interaction with the cells and mucus 
membranes [29,30], and therefore allowing the drug to penetrate well 
into the articular cartilage. Besides, tunable surface charge is also an 
important feature for successful intra-articular drug delivery. It has been 
found that positively charged nanocarriers can effectively bind and 
penetrate cartilage through reversible electrostatic interactions with 
anionic cartilage matrix proteoglycans [31]. 
Acidosis is a typical characteristic of arthritic joints, owing to 
insufficient vascular supply and increased metabolic activity [32]. 
Acidic extracellular pH can increase the responsiveness of nanoparticles 
in the inflamed synovium. Accordingly, RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were 
placed into PBS solution at pH 7.4 and 6.4 to stimulate normal and 
osteoarthritis synovial fluids, respectively. The results suggest that the 
prolonged release phase of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs is maintained for a 
period of time reaching 28 days after a short initial burst release of 
26.92 % of total DL in the first three days, due to the lower release under 
acidic condition than neutral condition. In vitro release experiments 
have shown that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were capable of achieving 
long-term release. This is due to the fact that the use of PLGA nano­
particles to encapsulate resveratrol can form stable nanocomplexes, 
effectively preventing degradation and inactivation of the drug and 
prolonging the half-life of the drug. Besides, some studies have also 
shown that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs can remain biologically active during 
prolonged release in vitro [12,33]. The in vivo pharmacokinetic study 
indicated that the concentration of RSV in synovial tissues following 
intra-articular administration of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs achieved its 
maximum concentration of 311.6 ng/g on the first day, and slowly 
decreased to 10 ng/g at day 28. Although intra-articular administration 
of resveratrol can slow down degradation and increase bioactivity when 
compared to systemic administration [34], we could not ensure that 
some degradation of resveratrol did not occur during the prolonged 
extended release over 30 days, and this remains to be addressed in our 
future studies. In a word, these in vivo and in vitro results demonstrated 
that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs can be applied for long-lasting and 
controlled-release intra-articular drug delivery. 
To assess the biological effectiveness of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs, the 
Fig. 6. Effect of RSV-PLGA-NPs on ultrastructural morphology of chondrocytes. (A, B, C) Control group, (D, E, F) OA group, (G, H, I) RSV-PLGA-NPs treated group. 
The ultrastructural morphology of chondrocytes was observed using TEM. Scale bar: 2 μm (A, D, G), bar: 200 μm (B, E, H), bar: 500 μm (C, F, I). autophagosome (red 
arrows), autophagic lysosome (blue arrows). 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
12
Fig. 7. Effects of RSV-PLGA-NPs on expression of catabolic mediators in cartilage and levels of GAGs, CTX-II, IL-1β, and TNF-α in the synovial fluid lavages from all groups. (A) QRT-PCR was used to analyze the mRNA 
expression levels of MMP13 and ADAMTS-5, AGG and Col-II in cartilage. (B) ELISA was used to detect the levels of GAGs, CTX-II, IL-1β, and TNF-α in the synovial fluid lavages. Values are presented as means ± SD, n =
5. *Control versus OA group, #OA versus RSV-PLGA-NPs group. *#P < 0.05, **##P < 0.01. 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
13
Fig. 8. Effects of RSV-PLGA-NPs on chondrocyte apoptosis and autophagy of OA rats. (A) TUNEL staining, 200 × magnification. (B) Immunohistochemical staining for Cleaved-caspase-3 (original magnification, × 200) 
and percentage of positive cells. (C) Immunohistochemical staining for P62, LC3 (original magnification, × 200) and percentage of positive cells. Representative immunohistochemical images are shown. Values are 
presented as means ± SD, n = 5. *Control versus OA group, #OA versus RSV-PLGA-NPs group. **##P < 0.01. 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
14
effects of free and encapsulated drugs on human articular chondrocytes 
were determined with IL-1β viability, apoptosis, inflammatory factor 
expression, extracellular matrix degradation and cellular internalization 
in vitro. A cascade of apoptosis and inflammatory events can be induced 
in arthritic chondrocytes, including the expression of MMPs, release of 
GAGs, and degradation of cartilage matrix [35]. The results of live/dead 
cell staining and MTT showed that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs significantly 
enhanced the cell viability and growth compared to the pure drug within 
the three-time intervals. Moreover, chondrocytes can function by 
internalizing RSV-loaded PLGA NPs into cells. RSV-loaded PLGA NPs 
obviously decreased the rate of IL-1β-stimulated chondrocyte apoptosis. 
Furthermore, our data indicated that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs significantly 
reduced the IL-1β-induced expression of inflammatory mediators (e.g., 
TNF-α and IL-6), and matrix-degrading enzymes (e.g., ADAMTS5 and 
MMP-13), suggesting that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs exert a protective role 
in the chondrocytes induced by IL-1β. 
Then, the effectiveness of intra-articular administration of RSV- 
loaded PLGA NPs on DMM-induced osteoarthritis rat model was exam­
ined. MRI, with its recent advancements, has been extensively used to 
detect the changes in synovial membrane, subchondral bone marrow 
and cartilage [36–41]. The primary outcome measure used in this study 
was MRI, due to its superior contrast resolution and sensitivity to tissue 
compositions, as well as it ability to assess cartilage changes in osteo­
arthritis animal models [42,43]. T1ρ and T2 are important markers for 
determining the changes in cartilage during early phases of this disease 
[44,45]. Increased levels of T1r and T2 are related to hydration changes, 
collagen loss and proteoglycan loss in the cartilages [46]. 
Subsequently, histological analyses were conducted to determine the 
therapeutic effects of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs on osteoarthritis rats. 
Pathological changes in DMM-induced osteoarthritis, such as sub­
chondral bone thickening, synovitis and cartilage destruction, were 
detected in human osteoarthritis [14]. Additionally, the OARSI scores 
were employed to detect the histomorphology of cartilages to reveal its 
biomechanical properties [47]. In the present study, the OARSI score 
analysis indicated the administration of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs markedly 
enhanced osteoarthritis-related pathological changes in the subchondral 
bone, synovium and cartilage degeneration, suggesting that RSV is a 
promising treatment for osteoarthritis. 
Synovial tissue inflammation has been recognized as a pathogenic 
factor of the knee osteoarthritis. The levels of IL-1β and TNF-α in the 
synovial fluids have been reported to increase in osteoarthritis. Both IL-b 
and TNF-a exhibit catabolic action and perpetuate cartilage matrix 
degradation in osteoarthritis, including the suppression of type II 
collagen and activation of proteinase [48,49]. In our study, the cartilage 
breakdown products (e.g., sGAG and CTX-II) inflammatory markers (e. 
g., TNF-α and IL-1β) were elevated in osteoarthritis rats compared with 
sham-operated rats, which are in agreement with previous findings. 
Topical administration of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs effectively suppressed 
synovial tissue inflammation, cartilage and bone turnover rate in the 
osteoarthritis rat model. As expected, the expression levles of MMPs and 
ADAMTS genes were downregulated in IL-1β-stimulated chondrocytes 
after treatment with RSV-loaded PLGA NPs. These results corroborate 
the biochemical data obtained from in vivo study whereby RSV-loaded 
PLGA NPs remarkably attenuated the release of CTX-II and GAGs in 
DMM-induced osteoarthritis rats. 
The progression of OA is often accompanied by the weakening of 
autophagic activity and resulting increase in the level of apoptosis [50, 
51]. Chondrocytes are the sole cellular constituents of normal cartilage. 
It has been reported that chondrocyte apoptosis is involved in the 
destruction of cartilage during osteoarthritis. Moreover, an increase in 
chondrocyte apoptosis has been anatomically linked to proteoglycan 
depletion [52]. Previous studies have suggested that RVS protects 
chondrocytes against apoptosis via different mechanisms, such as 
scavenging ROS [53], inhibiting mitochondrial membrane depolariza­
tion and ATP depletion [54], regulating the MALAT1/miR-9/NF-κB 
signaling pathway [55]. In the current study, tunel staining revealed 
that a massive amount of apoptotic chondrocytes was found upon DMM 
intervention compared to sham group, while the number of apoptotic 
chondrocytes was reduced in resveratrol-treated rats. In addition, the 
chondrocytes in OA group displayed a higher level of the apoptotic 
marker caspase-3 compared with sham operation rats, and this tendency 
was prominently attenuated by the intra-articular injection of 
RSV-loaded PLGA NPs. This implies that RSV-loaded PLGA NPs can 
effectively inhibit chondrocyte apoptosis, which is in agreement with 
our in vitro data. Taken together, our findings demonstrate that 
RSV-loaded PLGA NPs inhibit DMM-induced chondrocyte apoptosis, 
resulting in the efficient protection of articular cartilage. 
In summary, RSV-loaded PLGA NPs were successfully prepared in 
our study, which demonstrated prominent effects of inhibition of 
chondrocyte apoptosis and promotion of GAG synthesis in vitro. 
Notably, the superiority of RSV-loaded PLGA NPs was supported by 
displaying a 35-day sustained release of RSV following a single intra- 
articular injection. Through intra-articular delivery in rats osteoar­
thritis model, RSV-loaded PLGA NPs reduced cartilage degradation, 
synovium, cartilage and bone turnover, and subchondral trabecular 
bone changes by suppressing cartilage matrix degradation, joint 
inflammation, chondrocyte apoptosis and promoting autophagy. Our 
findings suggest that intra-articular delivery of RSV via PLGA NPs might 
be an effective therapeutic approach for treating and preventing of 
osteoarthritis. 
Funding statement 
This work was supported by Health Commission of Henan Provincial, 
China (HNSWJW-2021016). 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Liwei Wei: Writing - original draft, Conceptualization, Formal 
analysis, Methodology. Qingqing Pan: Data curation, Writing - review 
& editing, Methodology. Junyan Teng: Investigation, Methodology, 
Validation, Writing - review & editing. Hong Zhang: Supervision, 
Project administration. Na Qin: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, 
Supervision, Resources. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists. 
Data availability 
Data will be made available on request. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to express their gratitude to EditSprings 
(https://www.editsprings.com/) for the expert linguistic services 
provided. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2023.100884. 
References 
[1] D.J. Hunter, S. Bierma-Zeinstra, Osteoarthritis. Lancet. 393 (2019) 1745–1759. 
[2] M. Varela-Eirin, J. Loureiro, E. Fonseca, S. Corrochano, J.R. Caeiro, M. Collado, et 
al., Cartilage regeneration and ageing: targeting cellular plasticity in osteoarthritis, 
Ageing Res. Rev. 42 (2018) 56–71. 
[3] P.G. Conaghan, D.J. Hunter, J.F. Maillefert, W.M. Reichmann, E. Losina, Summary 
and recommendations of the OARSI FDA osteoarthritis assessment of structural 
change working group, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 19 (2011) 606–610. 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Materials Today Bio 24 (2024) 100884
15
[4] S. Yang, M. Sun, X. Zhang, Protective effect of resveratrol on knee osteoarthritis 
and its molecular mechanisms: a recent review in preclinical and clinical trials, 
Front. Pharmacol. 13 (2022), 921003. 
[5] N. Pannu, A. Bhatnagar, Resveratrol: from enhanced biosynthesis and 
bioavailability to multitargeting chronic diseases, Biomed. Pharmacother. 109 
(2019) 2237–2251. 
[6] A.Y. Berman, R.A. Motechin, M.Y. Wiesenfeld, M.K. Holz, The therapeutic potential 
of resveratrol: a review of clinical trials, npj Precis. Oncol. 1 (2017) 35. 
[7] N. Qin, L. Wei, W. Li, W. Yang, L. Cai, Z. Qian, et al., Local intra-articular injection 
of resveratrol delays cartilage degeneration in C57BL/6 mice by inducing 
autophagy via AMPK/mTOR pathway, J. Pharmacol. Sci. 134 (2017) 166–174. 
[8] W. Li, L. Cai, Y. Zhang, L. Cui, G. Shen, Intra-articular resveratrol injection prevents 
osteoarthritis progression in a mouse model by activating SIRT1 and thereby 
silencing HIF-2a, J. Orthop. Res. 33 (2015) 1061–1070. 
[9] L. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Sun, J. Yan, H.Q. Mao, Nanomedicine strategies for anti- 
inflammatory treatment of noninfectious arthritis, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 10 
(2021), e2001732. 
[10] D. Ding, Q. Zhu, Recent advances of PLGA micro/nanoparticles for the delivery of 
biomacromolecular therapeutics, Mater. Sci. Eng., C 92 (2018) 1041–1060. 
[11] Y. Liu, X. Wu, Y. Mi, B. Zhang, S. Gu, G. Liu, et al., PLGA nanoparticles for the oral 
delivery of nuciferine: preparation, physicochemical characterization and in vitro/ 
in vivo studies, Drug Deliv. 4 (2017) 443–451. 
[12] S. Wan, L. Zhang, Y. Quan, K. Wei, Resveratrol-loaded PLGA nanoparticles: 
enhanced stability, solubility and bioactivity of resveratrol for non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease therapy, R. Soc. Open Sci. 5 (2018), 181457. 
[13] Y. Hsieh, HPLC-MS/MS in drug metabolism and pharmacokinetic screening, Expet 
Opin. Drug Metabol. Toxicol. 4 (1) (2008) 93–101. 
[14] S.S. Glasson, T.J. Blanchet, E.A. Morris, The surgical destabilization of the medial 
meniscus (DMM) model of osteoarthritis in the 129/SvEv mouse, Osteoarthritis 
Cartilage 15 (2007) 1061–1069. 
[15] S.S. Glasson, M.G. Chambers, W.B. Van Den Berg, C.B. Little, The OARSI 
histopathology initiative - recommendations for histological assessments of 
osteoarthritis in the mouse, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 18 (Suppl 3) (2010) S17–S23. 
[16] W.J. Pinamont, N.K. Yoshioka, G.M. Young, V. Karuppagounder, E.L. Carlson, 
A. Ahmad, et al., Standardized histomorphometric evaluation of osteoarthritis in a 
surgical mouse model, J. Vis. Exp. 159 (2020), https://doi.org/10.3791/60991. 
[17] V.B. Kraus, J.L. Huebner, C. Fink, J.B. King, S. Brown, T.P. Vail, et al., Urea as a 
passive transport marker for arthritis biomarker studies, Arthritis Rheum. 46 
(2002) 420–427. 
[18] S. Bj¨ornsson, Simultaneous preparation and quantitation of proteoglycans by 
precipitation with alcian blue, Anal. Biochem. 210 (1993) 282–291. 
[19] M.E. Adams, M.E. Billingham, H. Muir, The glycosaminoglycans in menisci in 
experimental and natural osteoarthritis, Arthritis Rheum. 26 (1983) 69–76. 
[20] B. Boltnarova, J. Kubackova, J. Skoda, A. Stefela, M. Smekalova, P. Svacinova, et 
al., PLGA based nanospheres as a potent macrophage-specific drug delivery system, 
Nanomaterials 11 (2021) 749. 
[21] W. Zhang, R. Taheri-Ledari, F. Ganjali, S.S. Mirmohammadi, F.S. Qazi, 
M. Saeidirad, et al., Effects of morphology and size of nanoscale drug carriers on 
cellular uptake and internalization process: a review, RSC Adv. 13 (2022) 80–114. 
[22] H.P. Erickson, Size and shape of protein molecules at the nanometer 
leveldetermined by sedimentation, gel filtration, and electron microscopy, Biol. 
Proced. Online 11 (2009) 32–51. 
[23] L. Shang, K. Nienhaus, G.U. Nienhaus, Engineered nanoparticles interacting with 
cells: size matters, J. Nanobiotechnol. 12 (2014 Feb 3) 5. 
[24] A.G. Bajpayee, A.J. Grodzinsky, Cartilage-targeting drug delivery: can electrostatic 
interactions help? Nat. Rev. Rheumatol. 13 (2017) 183–193. 
[25] A.W. Palmer, R.E. Guldberg, M.E. Levenston, Analysis of cartilage matrix fixed 
charge density and three-dimensional morphology via contrast-enhanced 
microcomputed tomography, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103 (2006) 
19255–19260. 
[26] R. Stanescu, S.J. Leibovich, The negative charge of articular cartilage surfaces, 
Arthritis Rheum. 29 (1986) 573. 
[27] E.M. Shapiro, A. Borthakur, A. Gougoutas, R. Reddy, 23Na MRI accurately 
measures fixed charge density in articular cartilage, Magn. Reson. Med. 47 (2002) 
284–291. 
[28] A.G. Bajpayee, C.R. Wong, M.G. Bawendi, E.H. Frank, A.J. Grodzinsky, Avidin as a 
model for charge driven transport into cartilage and drug delivery for treating early 
stage post-traumatic osteoarthritis, Biomaterials 35 (2014) 538–549. 
[29] A. Di Martino, V. Sedlarik, Amphiphilic chitosan-grafted-functionalized polylactic 
acid based nanoparticles as a delivery system for doxorubicin and temozolomide 
cotherapy, Int. J. Pharm. 474 (2014) 134–145. 
[30] W.H. Abd-Elsalam, N.A. ElKasabgy, Mucoadhesive olaminosomes: a novel 
prolonged release nanocarrier of agomelatine for the treatment of ocular 
hypertension, Int. J. Pharm. 560 (2019) 235–245. 
[31] B.C. Geiger, S. Wang, R.F. Padera, A.J. Grodzinsky, P.T. Hammond, Cartilage- 
penetrating nanocarriers improve delivery and efficacy of growth factor treatment 
of osteoarthritis, Sci. Transl. Med. 10 (2018), eaat8800. 
[32] J.R. Levick, Hypoxia and acidosis in chronic inflammatory arthritis; relation to 
vascular supply and dynamic effusion pressure, J. Rheumatol. 17 (1990) 579–582. 
[33] N. Katila, R. Duwa, S. Bhurtel, S. Khanal, S. Maharjan, J.H. Jeong, et al., 
Enhancement of blood-brain barrier penetration and the neuroprotective effect of 
resveratrol, J. Contr. Release 346 (2022) 1–19. 
[34] A.C. Santos, I. Pereira, M. Pereira-Silva, L. Ferreira, M. Caldas, M. Collado- 
Gonz´alez, et al., Nanotechnology-based formulations for resveratrol delivery: 
effects on resveratrol in vivo bioavailability and bioactivity, Colloids Surf. B 
Biointerfaces 180 (2019) 127–140. 
[35] M. Daheshia, J.Q. Yao, The interleukin 1β pathway in the pathogenesis of 
osteoarthritis, J. Rheumatol. 35 (2008) 2306–2312. 
[36] E. Calvo, I. Palacios, E. Delgado, J. Ruiz-Cabello, P. Hern´andez, O. S´anchez- 
Pernaute, et al., High-resolution MRI detects cartilage swelling at the early stages 
of experimental osteoarthritis, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 9 (2001) 463–472. 
[37] E. Calvo, I. Palacios, E. Delgado, O. S´anchez-Pernaute, R. Largo, J. Egido, et al., 
Histopathological correlation of cartilage swelling detected by magnetic resonance 
imaging in early experimental osteoarthritis, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 12 (2004) 
878–886. 
[38] P.J. Watson, T.A. Carpenter, L.D. Hall, J.A. Tyler, Cartilage swelling and loss in a 
spontaneous model of osteoarthritis visualized by magnetic resonance imaging, 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 4 (1996) 197–207. 
[39] F.W. Roemer, R. Frobell, D.J. Hunter, M.D. Crema, W. Fischer, K. Bohndorf, et al., 
MRI-detected subchondral bone marrow signal alterations of the knee joint: 
terminology, imaging appearance, relevance and radiological diferential diagnosis, 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 17 (2009) 1115–1131. 
[40] J.P. Pelletier, J.P. Raynauld, F. Abram, B. Haraoui, D. Choquette, J. Martel- 
Pelletier, A new non-invasive method to assess synovitis severity in relation to 
symptoms and cartilage volume loss in knee osteoarthritis patients using MRI, 
Osteoarthritis Cartilage 16 (Suppl 3) (2008). S8–13. 
[41] D. Loeuille, A.C. Rat, J.C. Goebel, J. Champigneulle, A. Blum, P. Netter, et al., 
Magnetic resonance imaging in osteoarthritis: which method best refects synovial 
membrane infammation? Correlations with clinical, macroscopic and microscopic 
features, Osteoarthritis Cartilage 17 (2009) 1186–1192. 
[42] S. Drevet, B. Favier, B. Lardy, G. Gavazzi, E. Brun, New imaging tools for mouse 
models of osteoarthritis, Geroscience 44 (2022) 639–650. 
[43] G.A. Orozco, K. Karjalainen, E.K. Moo, L. Stenroth, P. Tanska, J.L. Rios, et al., 
A musculoskeletal finite element model of rat knee joint for evaluating cartilage 
biomechanics during gait, PLoS Comput. Biol. 18 (2022), e1009398. 
[44] J.E. Collins, E. Losina, M.C. Nevitt, F.W. Roemer, A. Guermazi, J.A. Lynch, et al., 
Semiquantitative imaging biomarkers of knee osteoarthritis progression: data from 
the foundation for the national institutes of health osteoarthritis biomarkers 
consortium, Arthritis Rheumatol. 68 (2016) 2422–2431. 
[45] P.M. Jungmann, F. Liu, T.M. Link, What has imaging contributed to the 
epidemiological understanding of osteoarthritis? Skeletal Radiol. 43 (2014) 
271–275. 
[46] M. Banjar, S. Horiuchi, D.N. Gedeon, H. Yoshioka, Review of quantitative knee 
articular cartilage MR imaging, Magn. Reson. Med. Sci. 21 (2022) 29–40. 
[47] W. Waldstein, G. Perino, S.L. Gilbert, S.A. Maher, R. Windhager, F. Boettner, 
OARSI osteoarthritis cartilage histopathology assessment system: a biomechanical 
evaluation in the human knee, J. Orthop. Res. 34 (2016) 135–140. 
[48] M. Kapoor, J. Martel-Pelletier, D. Lajeunesse, J.P. Pelletier, H. Fahmi, Role of 
proinflammatory cytokines in the pathophysiology of osteoarthritis, Nat. Rev. 
Rheumatol. 7 (2011) 33–42. 
[49] T. Mabey, S. Honsawek, Cytokines as biochemical markers for knee osteoarthritis, 
World J. Orthoped. 6 (2015) 95–105. 
[50] W.S. Lian, J.Y. Ko, R.W. Wu, Y.C. Sun, Y.S. Chen, S.L. Wu, et al., MicroRNA-128a 
represses chondrocyte autophagy and exacerbates knee osteoarthritis by disrupting 
Atg12, Cell Death Dis. 9 (2018) 919. 
[51] K.K. Vuppalapati, T. Bouderlique, P.T. Newton, V.O. Kaminskyy, H. Wehtje, 
C. Ohlsson, et al., Targeted deletion of autophagy genes Atg5 or Atg7 in the 
chondrocytes promotes caspase-dependent cell death and leads to mild growth 
retardation, J. Bone Miner. Res. 30 (2015) 2249–2261. 
[52] F.J. Blanco, R. Guitian, E. V´azquez-Martul, F.J. de Toro, F. Galdo, Osteoarthritis 
chondrocytes die by apoptosis. A possible pathway for osteoarthritis pathology, 
Arthritis Rheum. 41 (1998) 284–289. 
[53] Q. Liang, X.P. Wang, T.S. Chen, Resveratrol protects rabbit articular chondrocyte 
against sodium nitroprusside-induced apoptosis via scavenging ROS, Apoptosis 19 
(2014) 1354–1363. 
[54] M. Dave, M. Attur, G. Palmer, H.E. Al-Mussawir, L. Kennish, J. Patel, et al., The 
antioxidant resveratrol protects against chondrocyte apoptosis via effects on 
mitochondrial polarization and ATP production, Arthritis Rheum. 58 (2008) 
2786–2797. 
[55] G. Zhang, H. Zhang, W. You, X. Tang, X. Li, Z. Gong, Therapeutic Effect of 
resveratrol in the treatment of osteoarthritis via the MALAT1/miR-9/NF-κB 
signaling pathway, Exp. Ther. Med. 19 (2020) 2343–2352. 
L. Wei et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
