=== PAGE 1 ===
Calc. Tiss. Res. 6, 151-161 (1970) 
9 by Springer-Verlag 1970 
Comparison of the Effects of Excess Vitamin A 
and High Oxygen Tension on in vitro Epiphyseal Plate Growth 
I. Morphologic Response 
CARL T. BRIGHTON and ELLIOTT 2i. SCI4AFFZIN 
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
Received January 6, accepted April 20, 1970 
Epiphyseal plate organ cultures grown in medium containing excess vitamin A (100 USP 
units/ml) showed marked reduction in the length of the cartilage component of the explant, 
progressive loss of acid mucopolysaccharide stMnability of the cartilage matrix, loss of tile 
zone of hypertrophic cells followed by the loss of all zoning, an accumulation of cells at the 
bone-cartilage junction, and eventual detachment of the cartilage from the bone. Epsilon 
amino-caproic acid, a protease inhibitor, and chloroquine, a lysosomal membrane stabilizer, 
partially reversed these effects. Explants grown in 90 % oxygen showed no reduction in the 
length of the cartilage component, a progressive loss of acid mncopolysaccharide stMnability 
of the cartilage matrix, narrowing and eventual loss of the zone of hypertrophic cells, an 
accumulation of an acellular, PAS-positive debris at the bone-cartilage junction, and marked 
reduction in length of the bone component of the explant. EACA and chloroquine partially 
reversed these effects. 
The role of lysosomM enzymes in mediating these effects is discussed. It is suggested that 
different lysosomM enzymes may be operational in the presence of excess vitamin A than in 
the presence of high oxygen tension. 
Key words: Epiphysis Organ culture--Vitamin A~Oxygen--Morphology. 
Des cultures d'organe de rggions 6piphysMres, dans des milieux contenant un excbs en 
vitamine A (100 USP unit6s/ml), pr6sentent une nette r4duction de longueur du cartilage de 
l'explant, ainsi qu'une perte progressive de la colorabilit6 en mucopolysaccharide acide de la 
matrice cartilagineuse et une disparition de la zone des cellules hypertrophiques, suivie d'une 
disparition de la distribution ell zones, une accumulation de cellules au niveau de la jonction 
oscartilage et, patrols, une s6paration de l'os du cartilage. L'acide epsilon aminocaproique, 
un inhibiteur de prot6ase, et la chloroquine, un stabilisateur des membranes lysosomiques, 
inversent partiellement ces r6sultats. Des explants, cultiv6s en pr6sence de 90 % d'oxygbne, 
ne montrent aucune diminution de la longueur de cartilage: cependant ils pr6sentent une 
perte progressive de la colorabilit6 en mucopolysaccharide aeide de la matrice cartilagineuse, 
une r6duction et parfois une disparition des cellules hypertrophiques, une accumulation de 
d6bris acellulMres PAS positifs s la jonction ost6o-cartilagineuse et une diminution nette en 
longeur de l'os explant6. L'EACA et la chloroquine inversent par~iellement ces r6sultats. 
Le r61e des enzymes lysosomiques sur ces diverses manifestations est envisag6. I1 semble 
qua diff6rentes enzymes lysosomiques puissent intervenir en pr6sence d'un excgs en vitamine A 
et d'une tension en oxyggne 6lev6. 
Organkulturen yon Epiphysenplatten, die in einem Medium mit Vitamin A-~berschug 
(100 IE/ml) aufgezogen wurden, zeigten folgende VerSmderungen: 
a) eine deutliche L~ngenabnahme der Knorpelkomponente des Explantates, 
b) cinen zunehmenden Verlust der Fiirbbarkeit yon sauren Mucopolysacchariden der 
Knorpelmatrix, 
For reprints: C. T. Brighton, M.D., 317 Johnson Pavilion, 3400 Spruce Street, Phila- 
delphia, Pennsylvania 19104, U.S.A. 

=== PAGE 2 ===
152 C.T. Brighton and E. A. Schaffzin: 
c) ein Verschwinden der Zone hypertropher Zellen, gefolgt yon einem Schwund aller Zonen, 
d) eine Zusammenballung yon Zellen am Ubergang yore Knochen zum Knorpel, 
e) und schlieflich eine Abtrennung des Knorpels vom Knochen. Epsilon-Aminocapron- 
siiure, ein Proteaseinhibitor, und Chloroquine, ein Stabilisator der Lysosommembranen, 
kehrten diese Wirkungen teilweise urn. 
Explantate, die unter 90 % Sauersteff aufgezogen wurden, zeigten keine L/ingenabnahme 
der Knorpelkomponente, einen zunehmenden Verlust der F~rbbarkeit yon sauren Mucopoly- 
sacchariden der Knorpelmatrix, Verengerung und schlieglieh Verschwinden der Zone hyper- 
tropher Zellen, eine Zusammenballung yon acellulgren PAS-positiven Bruchstfieken am ~ber- 
gang vom Knochen zum Knorpel und eine deutliche L~ngenabnahme der Knoehenkomponente 
des Explantates. EACA und Chloroquine kehrten diese Wirkungen teilweise um. 
Die Rolle der lysosomalen Enzyme als Mediatoren dieser Wirkungen wird besprochen. 
Es wird vorgesehlagen, daft verschiedene lysosomale Enzyme bei Vitamin A-UberschuB wirk- 
samer sind als unter hohem Sauerstoffdruck. 
Introduction 
The epiphyseal plate, as a growth apparatus, is a sensitive organ responsive 
to many stimuli. Two stimuli known to be detrimental to embryonic bone grown 
in culture are high concentrations of vitamin A and increased oxygen tensions. 
The morphologic and biochemical changes produced by the former were pre- 
sented in a classic series of experiments by Fell and others [9-13, 16], and similar 
changes produced by the latter were described by Sledge (1965) and Sledge and 
Dingle (1965). The effects of both agents were attributed to increased lysosomal 
enzyme release and synthesis. It is the purpose of this paper 1), to compare the 
morphologic changes occurring in older (adolescent) epiphyseal plate organ cultures 
grown in high vitamin A concentrations with those grown in high oxygen tensions, 
and 2), to determine the effects of a lysosomal enzyme inhibitor and a membrane 
stabilizer on the amelioration of the morphologie changes produced by these 
two agents. 
Materials and Methods 
The costochondral junctions of twenty-one-day-old Sprague-Dawley male rats were grown 
on bovine thrombin/chick plasma clots in plastic culture dishes stacked in modified Torbal 
anaerobic jars fitted with polarographie oxygen sensors as previously described [6]. The 
culture medium consisted of M. E. M. Eagle/NCTC 109 supplemented with 15 % heat-inac- 
tivated fetal calf serum. 
A pilot study of vitamin A preparations in varying concentrations demonstrated that 
both vitamin A dissolved in ethanol (Retinol, Sigma) and vitamin A palmitate (Aquasol, 
USV Pharmaceutical Corp.) at 100 USP units/ml were equally effective in producing the 
morphologic changes described below. The maximum effective concentration of the lysosomal 
enzyme inhibitor and of the membrane stabilizer was also determined at this time. 
Control Explants. Sixty explants were gassed with 21% oxygen and 5 % carbon dioxide, with 
nitrogen making up the balance of the gaseous environment (ambient pressure) at saturation 
humidity. EACA (epsilon amino-caproic acid), a protease inhibitor [1 ], was added to the medium 
of twenty of the explants at 0.1 M concentration. Chloroquine, a lysosomal membrane stabi- 
lizer [2, 21], was added to another twenty explants at a concentration of 100 ~g/ml. The 
remaining twenty explants received no additives. All explants were grown for 14 days. 
Vitamin A Explants. Fifty explants were grown in the same gaseous environment as the 
control explants. Vitamin A palmitate (100 USP units/ml) or vitamin A ethanol (100 USP 
units/ml) was added to the medium of all explants. Ten explants each were harvested at the 
end of one, three, seven, ten, and fourteen days of culture. 
Vitamin A plus EACA or Chloroquine. Sixty explants were grown in the same gaseous 
environment as the control explants. Vitamin A pMmitate (I00 USP units/ml) was added to 

=== PAGE 3 ===
Vitamin A and Oxygen Effects on in vitro Epiphyseal Plate Growth 153 
the medium of all explants. In addition, EACA (0.1 M) was added to twenty of the explants, 
ehloroquine (100 ~g/ml) was added to another twenty explants, and the remaining twenty 
explants received no inhibitors. All explants were grown for 14 days. 
90 % Oxygen plus EACA or Chloroquine. Sixty explants were gassed with 90 % oxygen, 
5 % carbon dioxide, and 5 % nitrogen at ambient pressure. EACA and ehloroquine were added 
to twenty explants each in the same concentrations as above, and the remaining twenty 
explants received no inhibitors. All explants were grown for 14 days. 
Explants were grown at 37 ~ The medium and gas were changed twice a week. Each 
explant was photographed in its organ culture dish with a Nikon inverted microscope on 
the day of planting and on the first, third, seventh, tenth, and fourteenth day of culture 
for the vitamin A group and on the third, seventh, tenth, and fourteenth day of culture 
for the other three groups. Maerophotographs were made on Polaroid 3 x 4 black and white 
107 film utilizing brightfield illumination at 20x magnification. Measurements of total 
explant length, length of the bone component of the explant, and length of the cartilage 
component of the explant were made from the photographs. 
At the end of each experiment, explants were fixed in buffered formalin, decalcified in 
5 % formic acid, dehydrated, cleared, embedded in paraffin, and cut on a rotary microtome 
at 6 ~z. Sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, periodic aeid-Sehiff reagent, aleian 
blue (pI-I 2.7), and Gomori's trichrome. 
Results 
Control Explants. Explants grown in inhibitor-free medium exhibited an 
average increase in total length after fourteen days of culture of 11.24- 1.1%, 
while the cartilage portion increased 21.7 4- 2.0 %, and the bone portion increased 
5.6~ 0.8%. EACA had no measurable effect on the increase in length of the 
total explant, although the cartilage portion showed a slight increase and the 
bone portion showed a slight decrease. Chloroquine, however, inhibited all growth 
severely as evidence by failure of the explant and its component parts to show 
significant increase in length (see Figs. 1 and 2). 
The morphology and staining characteristics of the model used have been 
described elsewhere [6]. There were no differences noted with the various stains 
employed in this experiment between explants grown for 14 days with EACA and 
chloroquine and those grown without these inhibitors. 
Vitamin A Explants. The presence of vitamin A (100 USP units/ml) in the 
medium resulted in a decrease in total explant length that averaged 15.8  1.6 % 
by day fourteen. At the same time the cartilage component decreased 34.2 
3.9 % and the bone component showed a 0.44-0.8 % increase in length (see 
Figs. 1 and 2). 
Dramatic changes occurred in the morphology and staining characteristics of 
all explants grown in excess vitamin A. At the end of the first day of culture the 
zone of hypertrophic cells was well maintained but the matrix in the zone of cell 
columns was slightly PAS-positive. At day three the zone of hypertrophic cells 
was greatly reduced in thickness, and the matrix of all of the zones of the cartilage 
portion of the plate was strongly PAS-positive. At day seven the zone of hyper- 
trophic cells was completely absent in most of the explants. An accumulation of 
ee!ls was present at the bone-cartilage interface. While the origin of these cells 
cannot be determined definitely without prior cell labeling, it did appear that 
at least some of the cells were derived from chondroblasts released through 
matrix dissolution (Fig. 3C). The matrix of the cartilage portion of the plate 
1 Nean =~ standard deviation. 

=== PAGE 4 ===
154 C.T. Brighton et at. : Vitamin A and Oxygen Effects on in vitro Epiphyseal Plate Growth 
A 
20 
:50- 
T T Control ..,.. -." ~ ......... "~ and EACh 
,~.~..~.~" ~"- ~ Control 
........... .... Control .. 
~'~ ......... "i CH Iooq uJl~e 
i I I I 
5 7 I0 14 Days of Growth 
40- 
50- 
-4 
~ o. ' " ..... L'._. 
20- 
- 
50- 
4-0- 
'~'~ ~t Vitomin A 
Doys of Growth 
20 
~ q'lO 
~, v / ............ 2, 
~ 20 
C 
" "~ Control 
~,~wTT ~ J" (2P/~ 
>-'f_.-.T; ..... #] ....... 9o. o2 ood 
........... ~-': ........ ~1" .......... ~1 ............. -~1 90~ 02~ J- J" JL Chloroquine 
I-" I I 
3 7 I0 14 Doys of Growth 
Fig. 1 A-C. Graphs depicting mean and 95 % confidence limits of growth of cartilage portion of 
explant. A control, B excess vitamin A, C 90 % oxygen 

=== PAGE 5 ===
B 
"4 
A 
-4 
10- 
8- 
6- 
4- 
2- 
0 
6: 
sl 
10 
6 
8 ~ 
[0 
~t I Control 
Days of Growth 
4- 
2- 
0 ~ 
2 
4- 
Control 
o.---o Vit A + Chlor. 
~--z~ Vit, A 
t.,--,.~ Vit.A + EACA 
i i 
3 ~ ,; ,4 
Days of Growth 
30- 
20- 
iO- 
0 
I0- 
20- 
~ 30- 
4O- 
5O 
90% O~ EACA A 
i T o @ - ~.,...~,.---..__,~.~.,__~.~ .... .I ~ Control (2; %02) ~.~ j_ 
--'~"~_'~.'"'~..~"~ ........... ~ ................... ~ 90 % 02 + Chloroquine 
%%%. 
% 
% 
% 
%%t90% 02 
C Days of Growth 
Fig. 2A-C. Graphs depicting mean and 95 % confidence limits of growth of bone portion of 
expl~nt. A control, B excess vitamin A, C 90 % oxygen 

=== PAGE 6 ===
Vitamin A and Oxygen Effects on in vitro Epiphyseal Plate Growth 153 
the medium of all explants. In addition, EACA (0.1 M) was added to twenty of the explants, 
ehloroquine (100 ~g/ml) was added to another twenty explants, and the remaining twenty 
explants received no inhibitors. All explants were grown for 14 days. 
90 % Oxygen plus EACA or Chloroquine. Sixty explants were gassed with 90 % oxygen, 
5 % carbon dioxide, and 5 % nitrogen at ambient pressure. EACA and ehloroquine were added 
to twenty explants each in the same concentrations as above, and the remaining twenty 
explants received no inhibitors. All explants were grown for 14 days. 
Explants were grown at 37 ~ The medium and gas were changed twice a week. Each 
explant was photographed in its organ culture dish with a Nikon inverted microscope on 
the day of planting and on the first, third, seventh, tenth, and fourteenth day of culture 
for the vitamin A group and on the third, seventh, tenth, and fourteenth day of culture 
for the other three groups. Maerophotographs were made on Polaroid 3 x 4 black and white 
107 film utilizing brightfield illumination at 20x magnification. Measurements of total 
explant length, length of the bone component of the explant, and length of the cartilage 
component of the explant were made from the photographs. 
At the end of each experiment, explants were fixed in buffered formalin, decalcified in 
5 % formic acid, dehydrated, cleared, embedded in paraffin, and cut on a rotary microtome 
at 6 ~z. Sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, periodic aeid-Sehiff reagent, aleian 
blue (pI-I 2.7), and Gomori's trichrome. 
Results 
Control Explants. Explants grown in inhibitor-free medium exhibited an 
average increase in total length after fourteen days of culture of 11.24- 1.1%, 
while the cartilage portion increased 21.7 4- 2.0 %, and the bone portion increased 
5.6~ 0.8%. EACA had no measurable effect on the increase in length of the 
total explant, although the cartilage portion showed a slight increase and the 
bone portion showed a slight decrease. Chloroquine, however, inhibited all growth 
severely as evidence by failure of the explant and its component parts to show 
significant increase in length (see Figs. 1 and 2). 
The morphology and staining characteristics of the model used have been 
described elsewhere [6]. There were no differences noted with the various stains 
employed in this experiment between explants grown for 14 days with EACA and 
chloroquine and those grown without these inhibitors. 
Vitamin A Explants. The presence of vitamin A (100 USP units/ml) in the 
medium resulted in a decrease in total explant length that averaged 15.8  1.6 % 
by day fourteen. At the same time the cartilage component decreased 34.2 
3.9 % and the bone component showed a 0.44-0.8 % increase in length (see 
Figs. 1 and 2). 
Dramatic changes occurred in the morphology and staining characteristics of 
all explants grown in excess vitamin A. At the end of the first day of culture the 
zone of hypertrophic cells was well maintained but the matrix in the zone of cell 
columns was slightly PAS-positive. At day three the zone of hypertrophic cells 
was greatly reduced in thickness, and the matrix of all of the zones of the cartilage 
portion of the plate was strongly PAS-positive. At day seven the zone of hyper- 
trophic cells was completely absent in most of the explants. An accumulation of 
ee!ls was present at the bone-cartilage interface. While the origin of these cells 
cannot be determined definitely without prior cell labeling, it did appear that 
at least some of the cells were derived from chondroblasts released through 
matrix dissolution (Fig. 3C). The matrix of the cartilage portion of the plate 
1 Nean =~ standard deviation. 

=== PAGE 7 ===
~0 
~.~ ~ 
.~ 
e~ 
.~ -~ 
~ c 

=== PAGE 8 ===
158 C.T. Brighton and E. A. Schaffzin: 
was strongly PAS-positive. At day ten the cartilage portion of the plate was 
reduced in size, and it was difficult to distinguish any zoning of the remaining 
ehondroblasts. The number of cells present in the accumulation at the bone- 
cartilage interface was increased. The matrix of the remaining cartilage was 
strongly PAS-positive. At the end of the fourteenth day, the cartilage portion 
of the plate was further reduced in size, exhibited no zoning, was strongly PAS- 
positive in its matrix, and frequently became detached from the bone portion of 
the plate (Fig. 3B). Concomitantly, no morphologic changes were evident in the 
bone component of any of the vitamin A explants. 
Vitam~nA plus EACA and Chloroquine. Explants grown in vitamin A 
(100 USP units/ml) plus EACA (0.1 M) exhibited less reduction in length than 
explants grown in vitamin A alone. Total explant length decreased an average of 
4.5  0.5 % (vs. 16 To reduction in vitamin A alone), and the bone portion increased 
0.1 ~_ 0.4 % (the same as vitamin A alone). Explants grown in vitamin A and 
chloroquine (100 ~g/ml) gave the same result as in the control experiment, that 
is, no significant change in length of explant and component portions occurred. 
Both EACA and chloroquine prevented the histologic and staining changes 
demonstrated by explants grown in vitamin A alone. 
90 % Oxygen plus EACA and Chloroquine. Explants grown in 90 % oxygen 
for fourteen days exhibited an average decrease in total length of 19.6 4- 3.3 %, a 
0.8 4- 0.6 % increase in length of the cartilage portion, and a 38.7 4- 5.3 % decrease 
in length of the bone component. EACA partly reversed this toxic effect. The 
total explant length increased 4.9 4- 0.6 %, the cartilage portion increased 8.5 4- 
1.0 %, and the bone portion increased 1.4 4- 0.6 %. No change in the length of 
explant and component portions occurred with the addition of ehloroquine to 
the medium (Figs. 1 and 2). 
The morphologie changes occurring in explants grown in 90 % oxygen were 
similar to those reported previously. The cartilage portion of the plate showed: 
1), an initial increase in length, followed by a decrease and eventual disappearance, 
of the zone of hypertrophic cells, 2), a progressive increase in the staining of 
matrix with PAS, and 3), an accumulation of PAS-positive material at its base 
that was shown to be diastase-resistant, indicating a neutral mucopolysaeeharide 
or a glycomueoprotein (Fig 4, see also Brighton et al., 1969). The decrease in size 
of the bone portion of the explant, however, was much greater in the present 
experiment than was found previously. In some of the explants virtually all of 
the bone portion was resorbed (Fig. 4C). This may have been due to the increased 
concentration of fetal calf serum in the medium in this experiment as opposed to 
that performed previously (15 % vs. 7,5 %, respectively). Asher and Sledge (1969) 
have shown that bone resorption in high oxygen tension is dependent upon 
substances in natural media that are absent in chemically-defined media. No 
increase in osteoclasts was found to account for this bone resorption. Both EACA 
and ehloroquine prevented these morphologic and staining changes. 
Discussion 
By expressing changes in total explant, bone, and cartilage lengths as relative 
percentage values rather than as absolute values, we were able to compare 

=== PAGE 9 ===
Vitamin A and Oxygen Effects on in vitro Epiphyseal Plate Growth 159 
measurements of one explant to another irrespective of the proportion of bone to 
cartilage in either. Repeated measurements by both of us from the maerophoto- 
graphs established the precision to be 1%. 
Although both excess vitamin A and high oxygen tension reduced total 
explant length to nearly the same extent (by 16 and 20 % respectively) the effect 
on the component parts produced by these two agents was markedly different. 
While vitamin A reduced the length of the cartilage component by 34 %, oxygen 
increased that eomponent by 1%, and while oxygen decreased the length of 
the bone component by 39 %, vitamin A increased that eomponent by 1%. In 
the same manner, although both agents produced similar changes in explant 
morphology and staining characteristics (that is, progressive loss of acid muco- 
polysaeeharide stainability of the cartilage matrix and eventual loss of the zone 
of hypertrophic cells) marked differences also occurred. In excess vitamin A, the 
cartilage portion of the plate eventually lost all semblance of zoning, became 
greatly reduced in size, and frequently became detached from the remainder of 
the explant. This never occurred in high oxygen tension. On the other hand, in 
high oxygen tension the bone portion of the plate became greatly reduced in size 
and in some explants was resorbed. This never occurred in excess vitamin A. 
Finally, at the bone-cartilage junction in explants grown in excess vitamin A an 
accumulation of cells appeared, possibly representing released ehondroblasts; 
whereas in explants grown in high oxygen tension an accumulation of acellular, 
amorphous, PAS-positive, diastase-resistant neutral mueopolysaeeharide or glyeo- 
protein debris appeared at that junction. 
These differences between the morphologie changes produced by excess 
vitamin A and those produced by high oxygen tension in the adolescent epiphyseal 
plate model reported here were not recorded in the embryonic studies reported 
by others. On the contrary, previous studies demonstrate a close similarity in 
the morphologie response of embryonic bone and cartilage to these agents. Fell 
and Mellanby (1952), employing embryonic chick limb-bone rudiments, found 
that growth was arrested and that cartilage matrix shrank and was softened in 
medium to which excess vitamin A had been added. In late fetal mouse bones 
grown in excess vitamin A, they found that the cartilage matrix rapidly decreased 
in size and finally disappeared and that the bone also was quickly absorbed. 
Sledge (1965) and Sledge and Dingle (1965) found that eight-day-old chick 
embryo tibiae and femora became abnormally translucent and soft and exhibited 
greatly reduced longitudinal growth when cultured in 85 % oxygen at ambient 
pressure. Shaw and Bassett (1964), utilizing embryonic chick tibiae, found both 
cartilage and bone resorption in 95 % oxygen as well as a reduced rate of osteo- 
genesis. The differences in the morphologic response to excess vitamin A and 
increased oxygen tension as described in the present paper, and the failure to 
note such differences as detailed in the studies cited above, may be related to 
I) the maturity of the tissue explanted, 2) the species used, or 3) the medium 
employed. 
LysosomM enzymes have been implicated in the toxic effects produced by 
excess vitamin A and high oxygen tension on embryonic limb-bone rudiments. 
Fell and Dingle (1963) demonstrated release of an acid protease into the culture 
medium of such explants grown in excess vitamin A, and they showed that a 

=== PAGE 10 ===
160 C.T. Brighton and E. A. Sehaffzin: 
crude protease derived from rat liver lysosomes was effective in degrading cartilage 
matrix. Sledge (1965) and Sledge and Dingle (1965) found increased production 
and release of acid phosphatase and protease in oxygen treated rudiments. They 
concluded that the mechanism of increased hydrolytic enzyme release in the 
presence of excess vitamin A or high oxygen tension was the alteration of the 
permeability of the lipoprotein lysosomal membrane. In the experiments reported 
here the protcase inhibitor EACA prevented the histologic changes of toxicity, 
and it partially ameliorated the reduced elongation of the explant and its bone 
and cartilage components seen in excess vitamin A and high oxygen tension. 
The lysosomal membrane stabilizer chloroquine also prevented the histologic 
changes of toxicity due to these agents, but it inhibited growth completely. 
Allison (1965), working with tIeLa cells, chick embryo cells, and maerophages, 
found that ehloroquine or hydrocortisone markedly reduced the toxic effects of 
95 % oxygen. Since Simmons and Kunin (1969) reported that cortisone greatly 
reduced chondroblast replication, as judged by a 67 % reduction in tritiated 
thymidine uptake by rat proliferative zone cells, it seemed reasonable to select 
chloroquine as the lysosomal membrane stabilizing agent. The deleterious effect 
of chloroqnine on growth as evidenced in this investigation has not been pre- 
viously reported and is probably due to its ability to interact with DNA to form 
a DNA-ehloroquine complex [3, 7]. 
The fact that excess vitamin A affected mainly the cartilage component of 
the explants, while high oxygen tension affected mainly the bone portion of 
the explants, suggests that different lysosomM enzymes may operate in the 
presence of the former than in the presence of the latter. Studies supporting this 
hypothesis will be presented in a subsequent paper. 
Factors other than hydrolytic enzymes cannot be ruled out as being responsible 
for at least some of the toxic effects of these two agents. In high oxygen tension, 
inhibition of enzymes containing -StI groups has been reported in several 
tissues [8, 15]. Elevated oxygen tensions may also lead to irreversible oxidation 
of mitochondriM respiratory enzymes [5]. The latter are found in rat epiphyseal 
plates in highest activity in the zone of hypertrophic cells [14]. An initial transitory 
increase in length of this zone was the first morphologic change detected in the 
90 % oxygen explants in this experiment. 
References 
1. Alkjaersig, N., Fletcher, A. P., Sherry, S. : ~-Aminocaproic acid: an inhibitor of plasmino- 
gen activation. J. biol. Chem. 234, 832-837 (1959). 
2. Allison, A. C. : Role of lysosomes in oxygen toxicity. Nature (Lond.) 205, 141-143 (1965). 
3. Allison, J. L., O'Brien, l~. L., Hahn, F. E. : DNA: reaction with chloroquine. Science 149, 
1111-1113 (1965). 
4. Asher, M.A., Sledge, C. B,: Hyperoxia and in vitro bone resorption. Clin. Ortho. and 
Relat. Res. 61, 48-51 (1969). 
5. Biescher, ]). E. : Tissue metabolism under low and high oxygen tension. Man's dependence 
on the earthly atmosphere (K. E. Schaefer, ed.), p. 166-170. New York: MacMillan Co. 
1958. 
6. Brighton, C. T., Ray, R.D., Soble, L.W., Kuettner, K. E.: In vitro epiphyseal plate 
growth in various oxygen tensions. J. Bone Jr. Bur. 51A, 1383-1396 (1969). 

=== PAGE 11 ===
Vitamin A and Oxygen Effects on in vitro Epiphyseal Plate Growth 161 
7. Cohen, S. N., Yielding, K. L.: Speetrophotometrie studies of the interaction of chloro- 
quine with deoxyribonucleic acid. J. biol. Chem. 249, 3123-3131 (1965). 
8. Dickens, F.: The toxic effects of oxygen on brain metabolism and on tissue enzymes. 
I. ]3rain metabolism. ]3iochem. J. 4@, 145-171 (1946). 
9. Dingle, J. T. : Studies on the mode of action of excess of vitamin A. 3. Release of a bound 
protease by the action of vitamin A. ]3ioehem. J. 79, 509-512 (1961). 
10.- Lucy, J.A., Fell, H. ]3.: Studies on the mode of action of excess of vitamin A. 
1. Effect of excess of vitamin A on the metabolism and composition of embryonic chick- 
limb cartilage grown in organ culture. Biochem. J. 79, 497-500 (1961). 
11. Fell, H. B., Mellanby, E.: The effect of hypervitaminosis A on embryonic limb-bones 
cultivated in vitro. J. Physiol. (Lend.) 116, 320-349 (1952). 
12. --Dingle, J.T., Webb,)/[.: Studies on the mode of action of excess of vitaminA. 
4. The specificity of the effect on embryonic chick-limb cartilage in culture and on isolated 
rat-liver lysosomes. Bioehem. J. 83, 63-69 (1962). 
13. -- -- Studies on the mode of action of excess of vitamin A. 6. Lysosomal protease and 
the degradation of cartilage matrix. ]3ioehem. J. 87, 403-408 (1963). 
14. Greenspan, J. S., Blackwood, J. J. J. : Histoehemieal studies of chondrocyte function in 
the cartilage of the mandibular condyle of rat. Calcified tissues 1965. In: Proceedings of 
the third European symposium of calcified tissues (H. Fleisch, H. J. J. Blackwood, and 
M. Owen, eds.), p. 40-45. ]3erlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer 1965. 
15. Haugaard, N. : Oxygen poisoning. XI. The relation between inactivation of enzymes by 
oxygen and essential sulfhydryl groups. J. biol. Chem. 164, 265-270 (1946). 
16. Lucy, J. A., Dingle, J. T., Fell, H. ]3. : Studies on the mode of action of excess of vitamin 
A. 2. A possible role of intracellular proteases in the degradation of cartilage matrix. 
]3iochem. J. 79, 500-508 (1961). 
17. Shaw, J. L., ]3assert, C. A. L.: The effects of varying oxygen concentrations on osteo- 
genesis and embryonic cartilage in vitro. J. Bone Jr. Surg. 49A, 73-80 (1967). 
18. Simmons, D. J., Kunin, A. S.: Autoradiographie and biochemical investigations of the 
effect of cortisone on the bones of the rat. Clin. Ortho. and Relat. Res. 55, 201-215 (1967). 
19. Sledge, C. ]3. : Lysosomes and cartilage resorption in organ culture. Calcified tissues 1965. 
Proceedings of the third European symposium on calcified tissues (H. Fleisch, H. J. J. 
Blaekwood, and M. Owen, eds.), p. 52-56. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer 1965. 
20. -- Dingle, J. T.: Oxygen-induced resorption of cartilage in organ culture. Nature (Lend.) 
205, 140-141 (1965). 
21. Weissmann, G., Thomas, L.: Antagonistic effects of etiocholanolone and cortisone on 
lysosomes. J. clin. Invest. 43, 1254-1255 (1964). 
11 Calc. Tiss. 1%s., Vol. 6 
