=== PAGE 1 ===
The Postnatal Role of Sox9 in Cartilage
Stephen P. Henry1,*, Shoudan Liang2, Kadir C Akdemir3, and Benoit de Crombrugghe1
1Department of Genetics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center; Houston Texas
77030
2Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center; Houston Texas 77030
3Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center; Houston Texas 77030
Abstract
Sox9 is an essential transcription factor for the differentiation of the chondrocytic lineage during
embryonic development. To test whether Sox9 continues to play a critical role in cartilaginous
tissues in the adult mice, we used an inducible, genetic strategy to disrupt the Sox9 gene
postnatally in these tissues. The postnatal inactivation of Sox9 led to stunted growth characterized
by decreased proliferation, increased cell death, and de-differentiation of growth plate
chondrocytes. Upon postnatal Sox9 inactivation in the articular cartilage, the sulfated proteoglycan
and aggrecan content of the uncalcified cartilage were rapidly depleted and the degradation of
aggrecan was accompanied by higher ADAMTS5 immunostaining and increased detection of the
aggrecan neoepitope, NITEGE. In spite of the severe loss of Collagen 2a1 mRNA, the Collagen II
protein persisted in the articular cartilage, and no histopathological signs of osteoarthritis were
observed. The homeostasis of the intervertebral disk (IVD) was dramatically altered upon Sox9
depletion, resulting in disk compression and subsequent degeneration. Inactivation of Sox9 in the
IVD markedly reduced the expression of several genes encoding extracellular matrix proteins, as
well as some of the enzymes responsible for their posttranslational modification. Furthermore, the
loss of Sox9 in the IVD decreased the expression of cytokines, cell surface receptors, and ion
channels suggesting that Sox9 coordinates a large genetic program that is instrumental for the
proper homeostasis of the cells contained in the intervertebral disk postnatally. Our results indicate
that Sox9 has an essential role in the physiological control of cartilaginous tissues in adult mice.
Keywords
Sox9; aggrecan; osteoarthritis; intervertebral; Collagen II
INTRODUCTION
A major role of the transcription factor, SOX9, during chondrogenesis was strongly
suggested by the identification of heterozygous mutations at the SOX9 gene locus in the
human autosomal dominant disease, campomelic dysplasia (CD)[1, 2]. This disease, which
is caused by haploinsufficiency of SOX9, is characterized by severe skeletal malformations
*Correspondence to: Stephen P Henry, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center; Houston Texas 77030,
shenry@mdanderson.org.
Author’s Roles: Study Design: S.P.H and B de C. Study Conduct: S.P.H. Data Collection: S.P.H. and S.L. Data Analysis: S.P.H, S.L.
and K.C.A. Data Interpretation: S.P.H and B de C. Drafting Manuscript: S.P.H and B de C. Revising Manuscript: S.P.H and B de C.
Approving Final Version of Manuscript: S.P.H and B de C. S.P.H takes responsibility for the integrity of the data analysis.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Bone Miner Res. 2012 December ; 27(12): 2511–2525. doi:10.1002/jbmr.1696.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 2 ===
such as shortening and bowing of the long bones, cervical spine flexure, and scoliosis. The
requirement of Sox9 for cartilage formation was demonstrated by studies of mouse embryo
chimeras in which Sox9−/− cells were excluded from chondrogenic mesenchymal
condensations, but were found at surrounding, adjacent mesenchyme that did not express
chondrocyte-specific genes [3]. Furthermore, the conditional homozygous ablation of the
Sox9 gene during different stages of mouse embryonic limb development demonstrated that
Sox9 is necessary for mesenchymal condensations in which the commitment to the
chondrocyte fate is established from a common osteochondroprogenitor cell [4]. The
manipulation of genetically engineered mice has been a very valuable resource to delineate
the role of Sox9 in cartilage formation during embryonic cartilage development.
Understanding the role of Sox9 in postnatal and in adult cartilage tissues requires an
inducible Cre recombinase. Note that the ability to inactivate genes in cartilage postnatally
with an inducible genetic system is relevant since the articular cartilage along with the
secondary ossification center is only formed postnatally. Previously described cartilage-
specific inducible cre recombinase transgenes include the minimal Collagen 2a1 (Col2a1)
promoter transgenic lines such as Col2a1-CreER [5], Col 2a1-CreERT2 [6], Col2a1-rtTA
[7], and the targeted Agc1CreERT2 knockin allele [8].
The Sox9 mRNA in the articular joint cartilage of mice is detected at several time points of
postnatal growth up to 9-months with the highest Sox9 mRNA levels at the early phase of
rapid growth[9]. Also, Sox9 protein was detected by immunohistochemistry in the mature
articular cartilage at several time points including 15-month-old mice[9]. Gene expression
analysis of normal and osteoarthritic adult human articular cartilage revealed that Sox9
mRNA was reduced in the human osteoarthritic tissue [10]. Given the essential role of Sox9
in cartilage formation during embryonic development, one can postulate that Sox9 should
play an important role in the homeostasis of postnatal and adult cartilage tissues.
The transcription factor Sox9 is expressed in both the articular and growth plate hyaline
cartilages as well as the intervertebral disk (IVD) of the spine [11]. The intervertebral disk
consists of a dense connective tissue, which separates individual vertebrae along the spinal
column. These IVDs serve as a cushion that permits mobility of the vertebral column and
also as shock absorbers that protect the vertebral bones Furthermore, it has been shown that
SOX9 is required for notochord maintenance and normal vertebral column development
during mouse embryonic development [12]. Also, the levels of Sox9 in the human IVD
decrease upon disk degeneration [11] [13].
To test the role of Sox9 in postnatal growth and cartilage homeostasis, we have bred mice
containing the homozygous conditional Sox9 allele (Sox9flox/flox) [4] to the Aggrecan-
CreERT2 knockin allele [8] thus generating Agc1CreERT2; Sox9flox/flox mice. These mice
were injected with the inducer, tamoxifen, at different points during postnatal development
resulting in the conditional inactivation of the Sox9 gene in adult mice or; Agc1CreERT2;
Sox9Δ/Δ mice. The disruption of the Sox9 gene in postnatal growth profoundly altered the
cartilage homeostasis of the growth plate, the articular cartilage, and the intervertebral disk.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Mice
All mice were maintained on a hybrid 129S7; C57 Bl6 genetic background. For most of the
studies, male littermates of two different genotypes; namely, the control group Sox9flox/flox
and the experimental group Agc1CreERT2; Sox9flox/flox were injected intraperitoneally with
tamoxifen (T5648, Sigma, St Louis, Mo) emulsified in sunflower seed oil (S5007, Sigma, St
Henry et al. Page 2
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 3 ===
Louis, MO) at a concentration of 3 mgs/10 gm of mouse body weight. Mice were sacrificed
according to institutional animal regulations.
Genotyping of mice (See Supplemental Material & Methods)
Cell Death and Proliferation
Cell death was analyzed by the TUNEL assay (Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP
nick end labeling) method using TdT-FragEL™ DNA Fragmentation Detection kit according
to the manufacturer (QIA33, Calbiochem). Cell proliferation was analyzed by
bromodeoxyuridine staining of sections from mice that had been injected intraperitoneally
with BrdU (5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine, Invitrogen) at a dose of 0.1 mls/10gms body weight.
Mice were sacrificed two hours later post BrdU injection and later serial paraffin sections of
the tibial growth plate were stained for BrdU with the BrdU detection kit (Zymed/
Invitrogen). Those cells that were BrdU positive were counted in tibial growth plate sections
in a region spanning 1000 nanometers across the width of the growth plate.
RNA Analysis and Quantitative Real Time PCR
RNA was harvested from the lumbar intervertebral disks or the articular cartilage of the
tibial plateau with the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen), treated with Turbo DNase (Ambion), and
then reverse transcribed to first strand cDNA with the high capacity cDNA reverse
transcriptase kit (Applied Biosciences) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The
articular cartilage was dissected from the tibial plateau by a blunt cut with a scalpel blade
from the tibia bone of several 8-week-old Sox9 depleted Sox9Δ/Δ mice and Sox9flox/flox
littermate control mice that had been injected with tamoxifen at 7 weeks. The quantitative
PCR experiments were conducted with fluorogenic 5′ exonuclease assays with the
TaqMan® Gene Expression Master Mix with the following primer/probe sets shown in
Supplemental Material and Methods.
X-ray, MicroCT, and Histomorphometry
X-rays of mouse skeletons were performed by Faxitron, Femurs were denuded of soft tissue
and were fixed overnight in 10% formalin, and kept at 70% ethanol for microCT scanning
using the explore GE Locus SP system (GE Healthcare). The μCT image was analyzed with
the MicroView 2.2 Software package (GE HealthCare). Histomorphometry results were
examined with the OsteoMeasure histomorphometry system (OsteoMetrics).
RNA in situ hybridization
Five micron paraffin sections were subjected to RNA in situ hybridization using the
Digoxigenin RNA labeling kit (Roche-Applied-Biosciences, Indianapolis, IN) according to
manufacturer’s instructions. RNA Labeled digoxigenin-UTP probes for Aggrecan, Collagen
1a1, Collagen 2a1, Collagen 10a1, Indian Hedgehog, and Parathyroid hormone receptor
protein were used as described [4]. Immunohistochemistry and Immunofluorescence: The
tissues were fixed with 10% formalin overnight, decalcified with either 0.5M EDTA pH 8.0
for one week or Morse’s Solution for two days and then embedded in paraffin. Five micron
paraffin sections were subjected to epitope retrieval with either boiling citrate buffer pH 6.0
or enzymatic incubation with 0.1% trypsin followed by a hyaluronidase treatment (2mg/ml
in phosphate buffer pH 5.5 (MP Biomedicals, Solon, OH)). Immunohistochemistry was
performed with the SuperPicture Kit AEC Broad kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) or the
SuperPicture rabbit kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) with the True Blue Peroxidase substrate
(KPL, Gaithersburg, MD). Primary antibodies used for immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence are listed in Supplemental Material & Methods.
Henry et al. Page 3
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 4 ===
RNA seq Material and Methods
1 ug of Total RNA from the lumbar intervertebral disk was extracted using the TRIzol
method from Sox9 depleted mice and control mice and then processed into double stranded
cDNA (ds-cDNA) using the NuGen Ovation RNA-Seq System (cat. # 7100, NuGEN
Technologies, Inc., San Carlos, CA). Sequencing libraries were prepared using 100
nanograms of picogreen quantified ds-cDNA using the standard method for the Illumina
Paired End DNA Sample Prep Kit (cat. # PE102-1002, Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA). The
library size was 250 – 325 bp and was enriched with 12 cycles of amplification. Libraries
were quantified with picogreen and checked for sizing and amount of adapter dimers using a
Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity chip (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). The libraries
were sequenced on an Illumina GAII as paired end 36 nt. The sequences were aligned to the
genome using Eland-pair.
RESULTS
To circumvent the perinatal lethality of heterozygous Sox9 mutant mice and to inactivate
cartilage-specific genes in cartilaginous tissues postnatally, a genetic strategy in mice using
an inducible, conditional approach was adopted. The injection of the inducer, tamoxifen,
into newborn, 1, or 2-week-old Agc1CreERT2; Sox9flox/flox mice resulted in lethality
presumably due to collapse of the trachea or failure of rib cage expansion. Consequently for
these studies, the earliest time point for tamoxifen injection was 18-days postnatal.
Phenotypic changes were observed in the postnatal Sox9-depleted or Sox9Δ/Δ mice in three
different tissues- growth plate cartilage, articular cartilage, and the IVD of the Sox9Δ/Δ
mice.
Growth Plate Phenotype
The most noticeable gross morphological change to the skeleton upon the postnatal
disruption of the Sox9 gene was the arrest of the longitudinal growth of the long bones and
severe kyphosis of the spine. The faxitron of a 4-month-old Sox9-depleted Sox9Δ/Δ mouse
injected with tamoxifen at 6 weeks revealed a smaller body size and cervical flexure of the
spine compared to control Sox9flox/flox mice (Fig 1A). Even though the Sox9 protein is not
expressed in bone, micro-computerized tomography (MicroCT) of femurs from these
Sox9Δ/Δ mice revealed a severe reduction of trabecular bone in the epiphysis of the femur
underneath the primary spongiosa (Fig B,C). Furthermore, morphometric analysis (data not
shown) of the primary spongiosa showed a reduction in trabecular thickness and in total
number of trabecula for the Sox9 depleted mice compared to controls. In the Sox9Δ/Δ
mouse, the number of osteoclasts along the bone surfaces was higher as well as the area of
erosion surfaces along the bone surface for the Sox9Δ/Δ mouse.
To investigate the stunted growth of Sox9 depleted mice, histological sections were
performed on the knee joint that included the femoral and tibial growth plates. The growth
plate of a 6-week-old Sox9Δ/Δ mouse that was injected previously with tamoxifen at 3
weeks was compressed compared to control Sox9flox/flox mouse (Fig 2A,B). Upon depletion
of Sox9, the number of cells in the growth plate was reduced, and the remaining cells were
not arranged in a columnar orientation (Fig. 2D,F) that is characteristic of a control growth
plate (Fig. 2C,E). Furthermore, many cells in the Sox9Δ/Δ growth plate had a flattened,
spindle shaped morphology that was different from the morphology of the stacked
proliferative chondrocytes in the Sox9flox/flox mice (Fig 2D). Safranin-O staining, a vital
stain for sulfated proteoglycans, was dramatically reduced in the Sox9 depleted growth
plate. The reduction of Safranin-O staining upon disruption of the Sox9 gene was observed
initially in the proliferative zone, while Safranin-O was retained in the hypertrophic zone of
Henry et al. Page 4
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 5 ===
the growth plate in Sox9Δ/Δ mice. The high degree of disorganization and compression of
the growth plate often precipitated its precocious closure.
The proliferation rate of growth plate chondrocytes was markedly reduced in the Sox9Δ/Δ
mouse as shown by bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU, Fig. 2F,K). Also, the total number of cells
occupying the proliferative zone was lower in the Sox9 deficient mice, often with pockets of
hypocellularity in the center of the growth plate above the hypertrophic zone of these mice
(Fig 2F). Furthermore, several cells in the Sox9-depleted growth plate were undergoing
DNA fragmentation as detected by the deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
assay (TUNEL, Fig. 2H,K). In addition, indirect immunofluorescence detected several cells
in the center of the Sox9Δ/Δ growth plate that were positive for autophagy (Fig. 2J);
whereas, much fewer positive cells were seen in controls (Fig. 2I).
Molecular analyses of the growth plate were performed by indirect immunofluorescence of
sections from the growth plate of 25-day-old day animals that were injected previously with
tamoxifen at 18 days. As expected, in control Sox9flox/flox mouse (Fig. 3A,C), Sox9
immunostaining was seen in the chondrocytes of the reserve, proliferative, and
prehypertrophic zones, but no signal was detected in the hypertrophic zone. A dramatic
reduction of Sox9 immunostaining was detected in the compressed Sox9Δ/Δ growth plate
(Fig 3B,D). The efficiency of the postnatal ablation of Sox9 in the growth plate of 25-day-
old Sox9 depleted Sox9Δ/Δ mice injected with tamoxifen at 18 days was 85%. For the 7
days after the tamoxifen injection, the Collagen II (Fig 3D) protein persisted in the
extracellular matrix of the growth plate in the absence of Sox9 nuclear staining (Figure 3D).
However, Collagen II (Fig. 3D) and Collagen IX (Fig. 3F) protein levels were reduced in the
primary spongiosa of bone in the Sox9Δ/Δ growth plate. On the other hand, the Aggrecan
(Fig. 3J) and Link (HAPLN1, Fig. 3L) proteins were largely absent from both the growth
plate and primary spongiosa of Sox9Δ/Δ growth plate, demonstrating that the collagen
proteins were more stable than aggrecan and link proteins upon the depletion of Sox9. The
size of the hypertrophic zone was much smaller in the Sox9Δ/Δ growth plate as shown by
anti-Collagen Type X immunostaining (Fig 3H). The ADAMTS5 protein was expressed in
the reserve zone chondrocytes of the control femoral growth plate with very weak
expression in hypertrophic chondrocytes (Fig. 3M), but a much stronger immunostaining
signal was detected in the reserve zone of the Sox9 deficient growth plate (Fig. 3N).
Interestingly, Collagen I protein was detected, ectopically, in the extracellular matrix of the
prehypertrophic zone just above the Collagen X-expressing hypertrophic zone in the
Sox9Δ/Δ deficient growth plate (Fig. 3P), and this expression pattern correlates with the
Collagen 1a1 mRNA expression pattern (Figure Supl Fig. 1D). It is plausible that the
inactivation of Sox9 in the proliferative and prehypertrophic zones of the Sox9Δ/Δ growth
plate leads to dedifferentiation of the chondrocytes. However, the bone specific markers
MMP 13 and BSP were not detected in the prehypertrophic zone of the postnatal Sox9
depleted growth plate at the time point tested (Supl Fig. 2D,F). Nevertheless, the
immunostaining intensity of MMP13 and BSP was stronger in the hypertrophic zone of the
Sox9 depleted growth plate compared to controls.
Additional molecular analysis of several genes expressed during chondrocyte differentiation
was performed by RNA in situ hybridization on histological sections. In sections from the
tibial-femoral joint of 8-week-old Sox9flox/flox and Sox9Δ/Δ mice that were injected
previously with tamoxifen at 7 weeks, the Collagen 2a1 (Col2a1)mRNA was dramatically
reduced from growth plate and articular chondrocytes of the Sox9Δ/Δ mouse (Supplemental
Fig. 1B). Aggrecan mRNA was also dramatically reduced in the proliferative zone of the
growth plate in the Sox9Δ/Δ animals (Supl Fig. 1F). Two markers for the prehypertrophic
zone, Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) (Supl Fig. 1J) and Parathyroid hormone related peptide
receptor (Pth1R) (Supl Fig. 1L) as well as a marker for the hypertrophic zone, Collagen
Henry et al. Page 5
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 6 ===
10a1 (Col10a1), were also reduced in the growth plates of Sox9Δ/Δ mice compared to
Sox9flox/flox mice (Supl Fig. 1H).
Articular Cartilage Phenotype
To examine the role of Sox9 in the articular cartilage, the Agc1CreERT2; Sox9flox/flox mice
were injected with tamoxifen, starting at 6 weeks and sacrificed at later time points. The
postnatal depletion of the Sox9 protein was very efficient as determined by indirect
immunofluorescence with a Sox9 antibody (92% ablation efficiency of Sox9 in 5-month-old
Sox9 depleted Sox9Δ/Δ mice injected with tamoxifen at 2 months (Fig. 5B)). Furthermore,
the quantitative RT-PCR experiments revealed that the levels of Sox9 transcript
weredownregulated 8.2 fold in the articular cartilage of 8-week-old Sox9 depleted Sox9Δ/Δ
mice compared to Sox9flox/flox control mice. One consequence of the deletion of Sox9 was
the loss of Safranin-O staining above the tidemark (Fig. 4B). In mice injected with
tamoxifen at 6 weeks (Fig. 4B), but not in mice injected at 3 months or later (Fig. 4F,H), the
articular cartilage of the Sox9Δ/Δ mice was thinner in these mice compared to control
Sox9flox/flox mice. We speculate that this could be due to a slower development of the
articular cartilage when Sox9 was deleted at an earlier stage. However, no histopathological
signs of fibrillation or clefting at the articular surface of the knee joint were observed at the
light microscopy level in 4-,6-, or 12-month Sox9 depleted mice that were injected with
tamoxifen starting at 6 weeks (N=40 mice). Furthermore, adult 18-month old Sox9Δ/Δ mice
injected with only one injection of tamoxifen at 6 months did not display hallmarks of
premature osteoarthritis either despite the lack of Safranin-O staining (Fig. 4F). In these
mice, Safranin-O staining was still maintained in the growth plate of the Sox9Δ/Δ mice (Fig.
4F).
Aggrecan is an abundant sulfated proteoglycan in the articular cartilage, and its expression
level correlates with the intensity of Safranin-O vital staining [14]. In knee sections of 9-
week-old Sox9Δ/Δ mice injected with tamoxifen at 8 weeks, the aggrecan levels in the
territorial extracellular matrix of the articular cartilage (Fig. 5F) were reduced, but aggrecan
immunostaining was still detected close to the surface of articular chondrocytes. A dramatic
loss of aggrecan protein from the uncalcified articular cartilage was observed in knee
sections from 5-month-old mice previously injected with tamoxifen at 3 months (Fig. 5H).
Interestingly, the proteolytic enzyme, ADAMTS5 [15], which cleaves the aggrecan protein
at multiple sites was detected at markedly higher levels in the Sox9Δ/Δ mouse compared to
the Sox9flox/flox mouse (Fig. 5J). Furthermore, one of the cleavage product of aggrecan in
the articular cartilage was detected with an aggrecan neoepitope antibody NITEGE [15–17]
at higher levels in the surface articular cartilage of the Sox9Δ/Δ mouse (Fig. 5L).
The intensity of the immunofluorescent signal for the Collagen II protein in the surface
articular cartilage of 5-month-old Sox9Δ/Δ mice previously injected with tamoxifen at 2
months was similar to the signal detected in control Sox9flox/flox mice, suggesting that
inactivation of the Sox9 gene did not alter the Collagen II protein stability in the
extracellular matrix of the articular cartilage (Fig 5C,D). Nevertheless, the amount of
Collagen II staining detected in the ossified secondary ossification center of the Sox9
deficient mice was reduced, implying that de novo synthesis of Collagen II protein ceased in
the articular cartilage during the three month period or that Collagen II protein degradation
was more rapid in the secondary ossification center of Sox9Δ/Δ mouse compared to the
Sox9flox/flox mouse. Likewise, the levels of Lubricin protein (PRG4), a secreted protein
whose expression is restricted to the surface articular cartilage and is not present in growth
plate, did not change upon depletion of Sox9 in 5-month-old mice injected with tamoxifen at
3 months (Fig. 5 O,P). However, the intensity of immunostaining for Decorin was higher in
the articular cartilage of Sox9 depleted mice (Fig. 5N) compared to control Sox9flox/flox
mice.
Henry et al. Page 6
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 7 ===
Intervertebral Disk Phenotype
Although the depletion of Sox9 leads to severe kyphosis in the growing postnatal skeleton
(Fig. 1A), the Sox9 gene continues to play a role in adult mouse spine homeostasis. Sox9 is
expressed in the notochord-derived cells of the nucleus pulposus and in the sclerotome-
derived fibrocartilage cells of the annulus fibrosis of the IVD (Fig 7A). Sox9 is also
expressed in the growth plate chondrocytes of the vertebral body. The most apparent
phenotype upon X-ray of six-month old spines from Sox9Δ/Δ mice injected with tamoxifen
2 months earlier was the compression of the IVDs (Fig. 6A). This compression is more
clearly seen by microCT as shown in the IVD between lumbar vertebrae 3 and 4 (L3 and L4
in Fig. 6C) and was also observed in the other lumbar disks and the thoracic and cervical
IVDs (data not shown). The loss of Sox9 in the growth plate of the vertebrae leads to
precocious growth plate closure (Fig. 6C,E), although this does not affect the size of
individual vertebrae since adult 4 month-old animals exhibit very little additional growth in
the axial skeleton or the limbs. The growth plate closure phenotype is also shown with
histological Von Kossa staining of the Lumbar 4/5 vertebrae (Fig. 6E).
Collagen II immunostaining demonstrated that extracellular matrix Collagen II protein was
detected in the annulus fibrosis, but not the nucleus pulposus of the IVD (Fig. 7B), and the
efficiency of the postnatal ablation of Sox9 in the intervertebral disk of 3 month-old Sox9
depleted Sox9Δ/Δ mice injected with tamoxifen at 2 months was 94%. The depletion of
Sox9 from the IVD in 10-week-old mice that were injected with tamoxifen 2 weeks resulted
in a dramatic loss of Safranin-O staining from the nucleus pulposus (Fig. 7E,F). In other
Sox9Δ/Δ mice, Safranin-O staining was very low in the nucleus pulposus and very sparse in
the annulus fibrosis, but was still readily detectable in the growth plate, suggesting that
aggrecan loss occurs more rapidly in the IVD compared to the vertebral growth plate (Fig.
7G,H). The diminution of aggrecan immunohistochemical staining in the IVD (Fig. 7I,J)
correlates with the reduction of Safranin O staining in the Sox9Δ/Δ mice. The depletion of
Sox9 in 8-month-old Sox9Δ/Δ mice injected with tamoxifen at 6 months resulted in severe
disk compression (Fig. 7K,L).
We then performed quantitative RT-PCR experiments (qPCR) of several genes expressed in
the intervertebral disk (Supl. Fig 3) of 8-week-old Sox9Δ/Δ mice and control mice that had
been injected with tamoxifen at 7 weeks. The Sox9 mRNA was downregulated 9.6 fold in
the Sox9Δ/Δ mice. The extracellular matrix genes aggrecan (19.8 fold reduction) and
HAPLN1 (14.6 fold reduction) were the most dramatically downregulated genes of those
tested. The mRNA for the matrix metalloproteinase genes, MMP3 and MMP9 were
upregulated (+2.5 and +1.9 fold, respectively), as well as the ADAMTS5 gene (+1.3) in the
Sox9Δ/Δ mice suggesting that several extracellular matrix components might be degraded.
To further characterize the molecular changes resulting from Sox9 depletion in the
intervertebral disk, we analyzed the global RNA profile from the IVD of 6-month-old
Sox9Δ/Δ and control animals that had been injected with tamoxifen at 5 months with whole
transcriptome shotgun sequencing technology or RNA-seq. A list of differentially expressed
genes upon the depletion of Sox9 is presented in Table 1. The most downregulated gene was
Collagen 10a1, presumably an indirect effect since Sox9 is not expressed in hypertrophic
chondrocytes. Some of the downregulated genes have been previously described as direct
transcriptional targets of Sox9 [18]. The mRNAs for several extracellular proteins including
those of the three polypeptide chains encoding Collagen IX, as well as Collagen 2a1,
Matrillin3 and UCMA (Upper zone of growth plate and Cartilage Matrix Associated) [19]
were amongst the 14 most downregulated.
Transcripts of several secreted molecules were downregulated such as Sfrp5, secreted
frizzled-related protein 5 and Grem1, gremlin, which are antagonists of the Wnt/β-catenin
Henry et al. Page 7
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 8 ===
and BMP signaling pathway, respectively. Furthermore, amongst the 14 most downregulated
genes upon the depletion of Sox9, several are secreted molecules including, Rspo4, Sfrp5,
cytl1, and Gremlin. Sox9 has been reported to increase the BMP-antagonist gremlin
expression in the pyloric epithelium [20] and the related BMP-antagonist Noggin has been
reported to be a transcriptional target of Sox9 [4, 18, 21]. Other downregulated cytokines
include the molecule Rspo4, a member of the R-spondin family implicated in the Wnt/β-
catenin signaling cascade [22, 23] and cytokine like molecule 1, Cytl1, which is highly
expressed in the prehypertrophic zone [24]. In addition, mRNAs encoding for cell surface
molecules were also amongst the 14 most downregulated such as Clec3a, a C-type lectin cell
surface receptor protein with a strong expression in cartilage [25] and Fxyd2, an enzyme
subunit of the Na, K-ATPase ion channel reported to be an osmotic pump regulator in the
kidney tubules [26].
Other genes encoding proteins localized to the extracellular matrix which were not
represented in the list of the 14 most downregulated gene, include Cilp2 (log(2), −2.8),
Col27a1 (−2.5), Thbs1 (−2.3), Chad (−2.2), Hapln1 (−2.1), Col11a2 (−2.1), Comp (−1.9),
Vcan (−1.8), Cilp (−1.6), Acan (−1.4), and Bgn (−0.80). A few cytokines were also
downregulated, such as Lect1 (chondromodulin, −2.1), and FrzB (encoding the secreted
frizzled related receptor 3, −2.7), and Igfbp5 (insulin-like growth factor binding protein,
−1.5). Several mRNAS encoding enzymes were downregulated including loxl2 (lysyl like
oxidase 2, −1.3), loxl3 (lysyl like oxidase 3, −1.1), and loxl4 (lysyl like oxidase 4, −1.6)
responsible for collagen cross linking [27]and papss2 (3′ phosphoadenosine 5′
phosphosulfate transferase, −1.9) a key enzyme for sulfation of proteoglycans [28]. Several
cell surface receptors were down regulated including the mechanoreceptor (Fam38b or
Piezo2, −1.6) [29], and cation ion channel/receptor Pkd1 (polycystin-1, −1.2) [30], FGRR3
(fibroblast growth factor receptor 3, −1.3), TRPV4 (the osmotic pressure transient potential
cation channel subfamily V member 4, −1.5 ) [31, 32]and GPR126(G-coupled receptor 126,
−1.4) [33].
A pie chart depicting the subcellular localization of 259 down regulated genes in the Sox9-
depleted IVD illustrates that genes encoding for proteins localized to the extracellular space
are differentially expressed at the highest frequency (Supl. Fig. 4). Nevertheless, genes
encoding for proteins localized to the plasma membrane were also differentially expressed at
a high frequency, including 9 different G-coupled receptors, 13 transmembrane receptors,
and 9 ion channels. Moreover, genes encoding for 37 different enzymes were also down
regulated.
The table of the 14 most upregulated genes upon the postnatal depletion of Sox9 in the adult
IVD revealed two trends (Table 1, Bottom). First, several genes involved in sympathetic
neural transmission such as Dbh, dopamine beta-hydroxylase and Ddc, dopamine
decarboxylase were upregulated. Also, other genes encoding membrane-trafficking proteins
committed to vesicular transport in neurons such the synaptotagmins, Syt1 and Syt4, were
also upregulated. Secondly, several genes implicated in the inflammatory response, in
particular to reactive oxygen species, were also upregulated such as Ucp1 or thermogenin,
Mpo or myeloperoxidase, and Elane, the elastase neutrophil expressed molecules.
Interestingly, the chemokine CXCR2, a chemokine implicated in the activation of the
apoptotic pathway in chondrocytes was also up regulated [34].
The list of downregulated genes from the RNA-seq with a Z-score of at least 10 was
submitted to the DAVID (Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery)
Bioinformatics server at the NIAID division of the NIH [35]. The Gene Ontology
classification categories for the downregulated genes with the lowest –log(p values) were
cell adhesion and skeletal system development (Supl. Table 1, Top); whereas, the Gene
Henry et al. Page 8
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 9 ===
Ontology classification for the upregulated genes with the lowest –log(p values) were the
generation of precursor metabolites and energy as well aerobic respiration and oxidative
reduction (Supl. Table 1, Bottom).
Likewise, the same list of downregulated genes was submitted to the Ingenuity Systems
Software Package, and the disease related genes with the lowest –logs(p-value) were
connective tissue disorders and skeletal/muscular disorders (Supl. Fig. 5). Additional disease
gene analysis was performed using the DAVID program, and the diseases associated with
the downregulated genes were annotated according to categories with the lowest –log(p-
value). These diseases included skeletal dysplasias, connective tissue disorders,
intervertebral disk disorders, and arthritis (Supl. Table 2).
Since we did not enrich for polyadenylated genes in our RNA purification scheme and used
total RNA, we were able to obtain a list of differentially expressed long non-coding RNA
(ncRNA) upon depletion of Sox9 in the IVD from RNA seq experiments (Supplemental
Tables 3 & 4). Interestingly, many of the downregulated long ncRNA molecules were
embedded in the intronic regions of genes whose mRNA was also downregulated. Long
non-coding RNAs were located in the introns of the enzymes, Loxl2, a lysyl oxidase, and
Papss2, a phosphosulfate synthetase. Another ncRNA was embedded in the intron of Hapln1
(encoding link protein) and the transcription factor Sox5. Furthermore, two other ncRNA
downregulated upon the depletion of Sox9 were located near, Tcf7l2 and Pik3r1, molecules
involved in glucose metabolism. Two independent ncRNAs were located in the first intron
of the signaling molecule Smad3. Additionally, several ncRNA were also upregulated upon
the depletion of Sox9 in the IVD. Again, some of these ncRNAs were embedded in the
intronic region of genes implicated in gluconeogenesis and carbohydrate metabolism.
DISCUSSION
The transcription factor Sox9 continues to play a major role in the homeostasis of cartilage
in postnatal and adult mice. The consequences of the inducible, conditional disruption of the
Sox9 gene during the period of postnatal growth or in adult mice are different from those of
a germline mutation. Nevertheless, the deletion of the Sox9 gene starting at 6 weeks led to
stunted growth and kyphosis of the spinal column thereby evoking some of the skeletal
phenotypes manifested in the germline disease campomelic dysplasia[1, 2]. The growth
arrest in the postnatal Sox9 deficient mice is due to a malfunctioning growth plate
characterized by lower proliferation and increased cell death of growth plate chondrocytes.
The detection of Col1a1 mRNA positive cells and extracellular localized Collagen Type I
protein in the prehypertrophic zone of the Sox9 deficient growth plate suggests that some
Sox9 deficient chondrocytes adopt a different cell fate or become dedifferentiated. However,
neither BSP or MMP13 protein was ectopically expressed in the prehypertrophic zones of
the Sox9 depleted mice, althoughthe signal of immunofluorescence was stronger in the
hypertrophic zone of the Sox9 depleted mice. The absence of BSP and MMP13 in cells of
the prehypertrophic zone, where Collagen I is ectopically expressed would suggest that at
the postnatal time point tested, these cells have not yet adopted an osteoblastic lineage fate.
The cell death observed 7 days after tamoxifen injection maybe a direct consequence of the
loss of Sox9 transcriptional activity if certain transcriptional targets were critical for
chondrocyte survival in the growth plate. Additionally, the loss of expression of the
transcriptional targets of Sox9 (i.e. secreted signaling molecules, extracellular matrix
proteins, and others) may create an environment that is not permissive for cell survival.
The tidemark of adult articular cartilage is a basophilic line that delineates the boundary
between the surface uncalcified cartilage and deeper calcified cartilage. The inducible cre
recombinase activity of the Agc1CreERT2 mouse line is restricted to the articular
Henry et al. Page 9
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 10 ===
chondrocytes of the upper uncalcified cartilage above the tidemark [8]. Furthermore, Sox9 is
almost exclusively localized to the articular chondrocytes of the uncalcified cartilage, with
very few Sox9 positive cells in the region of calcified cartilage [36]. The depletion of Sox9
in the articular chondrocytes of the uncalcified zone led to the loss of Safranin-O staining
and aggrecan immunostaining in this zone. The absence of aggrecan mRNA in the articular
cartilage (data not shown), similar to the growth plate, suggests that the disruption of the
Sox9 gene postnatally halts the synthesis of de novo aggrecan protein. On the other hand, we
also hypothesize that the degradation of the aggrecan protein is also accelerated in the
uncalcified articular cartilage upon the depletion of Sox9. The reduction of aggrecan in the
territorial matrix of the articular cartilage in Sox9Δ/Δ mice was also accompanied with
higher levels of ADAMTS5 enzyme and increased NITEGE aggrecan neoepitope.
Moreover, increased expression of ADAMTS5 in the Sox9Δ/Δ mice was also observed in
two other Sox9 depleted tissues- the reserve zone of the growth plate and the intervertebral
disk. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that Sox9 interaction sites were
identified in both the Aggrecan [37]and ADAMTS5 genes of Rat chondrosarcoma cells [18],
suggesting that Sox9 transcriptional activity may orchestrate the synthesis and degradation
of the aggrecan protein in a coordinated fashion.
Histopathological signs of premature osteoarthritis such as fibrillation and clefting of the
articular cartilage were not observed in Sox9Δ/Δ mice even though sulfated proteoglycans in
the uncalcified cartilage were absent for a period up to one year. In contrast, the Collagen II
protein was detected by immunostaining in the uncalcified articular cartilage of the Sox9
depleted mice in spite of the severe loss of Collagen 2a1 mRNA suggesting that the
Collagen II fibril network was maintained in the articular cartilage of the Sox9Δ/Δ mice.
One explanation for this phenomenon could be that the cross linking of the Collagen II
fibrils may have occurred prior to tamoxifen injection thereby stabilizing the collagen fibril
network.
The reason for the absence of osteoarthritis might be at least in part accounted for by the
quadripedic anatomy of mice, in which weight bearing is distributed over four limbs, and by
the relative sedentary nature of mice in laboratory cages. Perhaps, a surgical intervention in
the joint of Sox9Δ/Δ mice may lead to more obvious signs of osteoarthritis. Most mouse
models for OA mutations are germline mutations; whereas, our gene disruption is induced
postnatally. Although we have shown that the postnatal loss of Sox9 in adult mouse articular
cartilage does not result in overt, clinical osteoarthritis, others have shown that the
conditional activation (gain-of-function) of a constitutively active β-Catenin in adult mice
by tamoxifen injection of adult Col2a1-CreERT2; β-Cateninfx(Ex3)/wt mice leads to an
osteoarthritic phenotype with severe erosion of the articular cartilage accompanied by
accelerated chondrocyte differentiation with the upregulation of Collagen X mRNA and
increased MMP13 immunostaining in the articular cartilage [38]. In another study, β-
Catenin was only transiently (not permanently) activated in cartilage postnatally by sacrifice
of the three-week-old transgenic mice [39]. The articular cartilage of these transgenic mice
had an acute loss of proteoglycan and accelerated aggrecan degradation closely resembling
those observed in our Sox9Δ/Δ mice. In reciprocal experiments, β-Catenin was permanently
deleted in 5-day-old Col2a1-CreERT;β-Cateninfx/fx mice before the development of the
articular cartilage, and sacrificed later at 7 weeks. These mice exhibited clefting and
deterioration of the articular cartilage; however, it is difficult to compare these studies to our
postnatal Sox9 depletion studies, since our experiments were performed starting at three
weeks postnatal or later in adult mice after the establishment of the articular cartilage.
Furthermore, the intervertebral disk was also studied in these transgenic mice in which β-
Catenin was transiently activated (gain-of-function) or permanently disrupted (loss-of–
function) [40].
Henry et al. Page 10
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 11 ===
Although the Sox9 depleted mice do not display overt osteoarthritis, the drastic proteoglycan
reduction in the uncalcified zone of the articular cartilage was not replenished in adult mice
after the Sox9 gene was disrupted in the articular chondrocytes of the uncalcified cartilage.
In adult 18-month-old Sox9Δ/Δ mice that had been injected with one injection of tamoxifen
at 6 months, the upper uncalcified articular cartilage was still devoid of Safranin-O staining
in the uncalcified articular cartilage. The complete lack of de novo proteoglycan synthesis in
the 12 month period points to either an inability of the highly quiescent articular
chondrocytes to mount a repair process in the uncalcified articular cartilage in the absence of
Sox9 or that the trigger for repair was insufficient. The presence of Safranin-O staining in
the deeper calcified cartilage of the Sox9 depleted mice may be due to pre-existing aggrecan
protein in the extracellular matrix of the calcified zone prior to tamoxifen injection that
remained stable in the calcified cartilage.
Nevertheless, chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that several
extracellular matrix genes, such as Prg4 (encoding the lubricin protein) and Decorin, did not
harbor Sox9 interaction sites in rat Chondrosarcoma cells between −15 kb 5′ to the start of
transcription and + 10 kb 3′ to the polyA site in these genes [18]. This would suggest that
certain cartilage extracellular matrix genes may not be direct transcriptional targets of Sox9.
In the Sox9Δ/Δ mice, lubricin protein was detected and decorin immunostaining was more
robust in the articular cartilage, suggesting that some genetic compensatory mechanisms
might be operating in the Sox9 deficient mice.
The homeostasis of the intervertebral disk (IVD) was severely disrupted upon the depletion
of Sox9. A dramatic loss of Safranin-O staining was observed in histology of the IVD two
weeks after tamoxifen injection. Quantitative RT-PCR experiments with pre-selected genes
revealed that several genes encoding for extracellular matrix (ECM) components were down
regulated upon the depletion of Sox9. Furthermore, enzymes responsible for the cleavage of
extracellular matrix components such as MMP3 and ADAMTS5 were also modestly
upregulated in the Sox9 depleted mouse. For this qRT-PCR experiment, tamoxifen was
injected postnatally in growing seven-week-old mice. To better understand the postnatal role
of Sox9 in the IVD of adult mice, we injected our mice at 5 months of age and waited one
month post-injection to sacrifice the mice and harvested total RNA from the lumbar IVDs.
We obtained a global representation of genes that were differentially expressed upon the
depletion of Sox9 in the IVD by RNA sequence technology. Several ECM genes were
downregulated in the Sox9Δ/Δ IVD, and not surprisingly, many of these ECM genes have
also been determined to be direct transcriptional targets of Sox9 in chondrocytic cells[18].
Interestingly, several of the most down regulated genes have been implicated in
degenerative disk disease by genome wide association studies (GWAS) such as Collagen
9a1, Collagen 9a2 [41–44], aggrecan [45–48], and CILP [49]. Additionally, several enzymes
were also downregulated upon the depletion of Sox9 in the intervertebral disc. For example,
three genes encoding for three different lysyl oxidase enzymes implicated in the biosynthetic
cross-linking of collagen polypeptide chains at lysine residues [50] (lysyl oxidases like 2, 3,
and 4) were all downregulated. Furthermore, another gene encoding for the obligate
sulfotransferase enzyme, papps2 encoding for 3′ phosphoadenosine 5′ phosphosulfate
transferase responsible for the posttranslational sulfation of proteins such as proteoglycans
as well as carbohydrates and lipids was downregulated in the IVD. Two lines of evidence
support that the papss2 gene plays an important role in skeletogenesis. The autosomal
recessive mutation of the mouse papps2 gene results in the brachymorph mouse (Bm) [51]
that exhibits shorter limbs, and a mutation in the orthologous human gene results in
Pakistani type of human spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia [52]. Moreover, the papss2 gene
was identified as the most differentially expressed enzyme gene in a microarray experiment
using limb buds from embryonic 12.5 Sox9-3′ EGFP knock-in embryos compared to limb
buds from E12.5 Sox9-EGFP/EGFP null chimeric embryos [53] suggesting that papps2 may
Henry et al. Page 11
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 12 ===
be a transcriptional target of Sox9. We speculate that Sox9 transcription factor may have a
bifunctional role to coordinate the synthesis as well as posttranslational modification of
several ECM proteins.
The loss of proteoglycan, in particular aggrecan, was observed histologically in cartilaginous
tissues of the Sox9 depleted mouse including the growth plate, articular cartilage, and IVD.
Aggrecan is the most abundant proteoglycan in these tissues, and this highly negatively
charged proteoglycan attracts water, and this osmotic property plays a major role in the
compressibility and mechanical loading of the intervertebral disk [54]and the articular
cartilage. Interestingly, the normal homeostasis of the intervertebral disk in the mouse is
dependent upon the levels of the aggrecan proteoglycan contained in the disk, since the
heterozygote cartilage matrix deficient mouse (cmd/+) containing only one functional copy
of the mouse aggrecan gene exhibits IVD compression and degeneration at one year of age,
but does not display abnormalities in the joints [55]. Consequently, in the mouse, the
haploinsufficiency of the aggrecan gene has a direct impact upon IVD homeostasis.
Therefore, we postulated that the loss of proteoglycan in the Sox9 depleted mice would
diminish the hydration of the IVD thus perturbing the mechanical loading of the disk
resulting in disk compression and subsequent degeneration. Upon examination of the list of
259 genes downregulated in the IVD of the Sox9 depleted mouse, several genes implicated
in mechanotransduction were identified. For example, the polycystin gene (pkd1) that
encodes for an integral membrane protein that has been shown to be a mechanical flow
“sensor” in the renal epithelium was downregulated. The homozygous pkd1-null mice
display skeletal abnormalities, including stunted growth and kyphosis of the spine[30].
Furthermore, the conditional inactivation of the pkd1 gene with a wnt1-cre driver results in
abnormal midpalatal suture expansion suggesting that the pkd1 gene is important for
mechanotransduction [56] Another strong candidate was the gene TRPV4 encoding for the
transient receptor potential villanoid calcium ion channel that is believed to be an
“osmolarity sensor” [57, 58]. Human skeletal genetic disease associated with TRPV4 have
been identified- the gain of function of TRPV4 leads to autosomal dominant brachyolmia
[59]; whereas, the loss of function of TRPV4 leads to inherited arthropathy [60]. The
recently identified mechano-activated ion channel encoded by the gene Piezo2 or Fam38b
[29]was also downregulated in the IVD of the Sox9 depleted mouse. Hence, three genes
implicated with mechanotransduction are downregulated upon depletion of Sox9 in the IVD.
The downregulation of the G-coupled receptor 126 (GPR126) gene is particularly interesting
since genetic polymorphisms at the GPR126 locus may be associated with heritability of
human height as shown by three independent genome wide association studies [61–63].
Furthermore, in one of the GWAS studies, the GPR126 association to overall human height
was more specific to spine length (trunk) than to femur length (limb) or hip length. It would
be very informative to identify Sox9 interaction sites in the chromatin environment of the
IVD genome by Chromatin Immunoprecipitation sequence technologies (ChIP seq) and
compare these results with differential RNA sequence technology.
The upregulation of many genes with high expression in the central nervous system upon
depletion of Sox9 may be an indirect effect. It has been shown that the abnormal nerve
ingrowth to the inner portion of the annulus fibrosis and the nucleus pulposus occurs in the
diseased intervertebral disk [64]. Interestingly, sometimes, this pathological innervation to
the center of the diseased disk was sometimes accompanied by new blood vessel formation
[65]. Another unexpected finding was the upregulation of many enzymes involved in
aerobic respiration. We speculate that the hypoxic environment of the IVD is altered during
the one month period of Sox9 depletion and that perhaps oxidative phosphorylation becomes
more prominent. However, the compression of the IVD may lead to increased apoptosis that
Henry et al. Page 12
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 13 ===
may be accompanied by an increase of reactive oxidative species rather than
neovascularization of the inner IVD.
Another advantage of using RNA sequence technology was the identification of many long
non-coding RNAs that were either down regulated or up regulated in the IVD of the Sox9
depleted mouse. However it is not known if these ncRNAs are direct transcriptional targets
of Sox9.
In conclusion, our results indicate that the role of Sox9 as a master differentiation factor,
which has been previously documented during embryonic development of the skeleton,
persists postnatally and in adult mice to control the homeostasis of connective tissues such
as the growth plate, articular cartilage, and the intervertebral disk. In the intervertebral disks,
Sox9 coordinates, not only the expression of extracellular matrix genes, but also the
expression of genes that have a role in the posttranslational modification of these ECM
proteins, the genes for cytokines, cell surface receptors, and ion channels that control the
physiology of the cells in this tissue. We hypothesis that Sox9 may have a similar function
of coordination in other cartilaginous tissues. We speculate that Sox9 could play a role in the
pathology of degenerative diseases affecting cartilage, and that the molecules that control
the expression or activity of Sox9 should be considered in therapeutic approaches to these
diseases.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Hongli Tang, MD and Louis S Ramagli, PhD for technical support from the DNA Analysis
Core Facility at University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center for gene expression and RNA sequencing
experiments.
Funding for Stephen P Henry, Arthritis Foundation and National Institutes of Health (NIH) T32 Training Grant.
Funding for Benoit de Crombrugghe, NIH, AR053568.
References
1. Foster JW, et al. Campomelic dysplasia and autosomal sex reversal caused by mutations in an SRY-
related gene. Nature. 1994; 372(6506):525–30. [PubMed: 7990924]
2. Wagner T, et al. Autosomal sex reversal and campomelic dysplasia are caused by mutations in and
around the SRY-related gene SOX9. Cell. 1994; 79(6):1111–20. [PubMed: 8001137]
3. Bi W, et al. Sox9 is required for cartilage formation. Nat Genet. 1999; 22(1):85–9. [PubMed:
10319868]
4. Akiyama H, et al. The transcription factor Sox9 has essential roles in successive steps of the
chondrocyte differentiation pathway and is required for expression of Sox5 and Sox6. Genes Dev.
2002; 16(21):2813–28. [PubMed: 12414734]
5. Nakamura E, Nguyen MT, Mackem S. Kinetics of tamoxifen-regulated Cre activity in mice using a
cartilage-specific CreER(T) to assay temporal activity windows along the proximodistal limb
skeleton. Dev Dyn. 2006; 235(9):2603–12. [PubMed: 16894608]
6. Chen M, et al. Generation of a transgenic mouse model with chondrocyte-specific and tamoxifen-
inducible expression of Cre recombinase. Genesis. 2007; 45(1):44–50. [PubMed: 17211877]
7. Grover J, Roughley PJ. Generation of a transgenic mouse in which Cre recombinase is expressed
under control of the type II collagen promoter and doxycycline administration. Matrix Biol. 2006;
25(3):158–65. [PubMed: 16386413]
8. Henry SP, et al. Generation of aggrecan-CreERT2 knockin mice for inducible Cre activity in adult
cartilage. Genesis. 2009; 47(12):805–14. [PubMed: 19830818]
Henry et al. Page 13
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 14 ===
9. Salminen H, Vuorio E, Saamanen AM. Expression of Sox9 and type IIA procollagen during
attempted repair of articular cartilage damage in a transgenic mouse model of osteoarthritis.
Arthritis Rheum. 2001; 44(4):947–55. [PubMed: 11315934]
10. Haag J, Gebhard PM, Aigner T. SOX gene expression in human osteoarthritic cartilage.
Pathobiology. 2008; 75(3):195–9. [PubMed: 18550917]
11. Sive JI, et al. Expression of chondrocyte markers by cells of normal and degenerate intervertebral
discs. Mol Pathol. 2002; 55(2):91–7. [PubMed: 11950957]
12. Barrionuevo F, et al. Sox9 is required for notochord maintenance in mice. Dev Biol. 2006; 295(1):
128–40. [PubMed: 16678811]
13. Gruber HE, et al. The SOX9 transcription factor in the human disc: decreased immunolocalization
with age and disc degeneration. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2005; 30(6):625–30. [PubMed: 15770176]
14. Thalmann I, et al. Uronic acid-containing glycosaminoglycans and keratan sulfate are present in
the tectorial membrane of the inner ear: functional implications. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1993;
307(2):391–6. [PubMed: 8274027]
15. Abbaszade I, et al. Cloning and characterization of ADAMTS11, an aggrecanase from the
ADAMTS family. J Biol Chem. 1999; 274(33):23443–50. [PubMed: 10438522]
16. Singer, et al. Aggrecanase and metalloproteinase-specific aggrecan neo-epitopes are induced in the
articular cartilage of mice with collagen II-induced arthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 1997; 5(6):
407–18. [PubMed: 9536289]
17. Gendron C, et al. Proteolytic activities of human ADAMTS-5: comparative studies with
ADAMTS-4. J Biol Chem. 2007; 282(25):18294–306. [PubMed: 17430884]
18. Oh CD, et al. Identification of SOX9 interaction sites in the genome of chondrocytes. PLoS One.
2010; 5(4):e10113. [PubMed: 20404928]
19. Surmann-Schmitt C, et al. Ucma, a novel secreted cartilage-specific protein with implications in
osteogenesis. J Biol Chem. 2008; 283(11):7082–93. [PubMed: 18156182]
20. Moniot B, et al. SOX9 specifies the pyloric sphincter epithelium through mesenchymal-epithelial
signals. Development. 2004; 131(15):3795–804. [PubMed: 15240557]
21. Zehentner BK, Haussmann A, Burtscher H. The bone morphogenetic protein antagonist Noggin is
regulated by Sox9 during endochondral differentiation. Development, growth & differentiation.
2002; 44(1):1–9.
22. Bergmann C, et al. Mutations in the gene encoding the Wnt-signaling component R-spondin 4
(RSPO4) cause autosomal recessive anonychia. American journal of human genetics. 2006; 79(6):
1105–9. [PubMed: 17186469]
23. Blaydon DC, et al. The gene encoding R-spondin 4 (RSPO4), a secreted protein implicated in Wnt
signaling, is mutated in inherited anonychia. Nature genetics. 2006; 38(11):1245–7. [PubMed:
17041604]
24. Kim JS, Ryoo ZY, Chun JS. Cytokine-like 1 (Cytl1) regulates the chondrogenesis of mesenchymal
cells. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2007; 282(40):29359–67. [PubMed: 17644814]
25. Neame PJ, Tapp H, Grimm DR. The cartilage-derived, C-type lectin (CLECSF1): structure of the
gene and chromosomal location. Biochimica et biophysica acta. 1999; 1446(3):193–202.
[PubMed: 10524194]
26. Geering K, et al. FXYD proteins: new tissue- and isoform-specific regulators of Na,K-ATPase.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 2003; 986:388–94. [PubMed: 12763855]
27. Lucero HA, Kagan HM. Lysyl oxidase: an oxidative enzyme and effector of cell function. Cellular
and molecular life sciences: CMLS. 2006; 63(19–20):2304–16. [PubMed: 16909208]
28. Stelzer C, et al. Expression profile of Papss2 (3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate synthase 2)
during cartilage formation and skeletal development in the mouse embryo. Developmental
dynamics: an official publication of the American Association of Anatomists. 2007; 236(5):1313–
8. [PubMed: 17436279]
29. Coste B, et al. Piezo1 and Piezo2 are essential components of distinct mechanically activated
cation channels. Science. 2010; 330(6000):55–60. [PubMed: 20813920]
30. Boulter C, et al. Cardiovascular, skeletal, and renal defects in mice with a targeted disruption of the
Pkd1 gene. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.
2001; 98(21):12174–9. [PubMed: 11593033]
Henry et al. Page 14
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 15 ===
31. Phan MN, et al. Functional characterization of TRPV4 as an osmotically sensitive ion channel in
porcine articular chondrocytes. Arthritis and rheumatism. 2009; 60(10):3028–37. [PubMed:
19790068]
32. Clark AL, et al. Chondroprotective role of the osmotically sensitive ion channel transient receptor
potential vanilloid 4: age- and sex-dependent progression of osteoarthritis in Trpv4-deficient mice.
Arthritis and rheumatism. 2010; 62(10):2973–83. [PubMed: 20583100]
33. Bjarnadottir TK, et al. The human and mouse repertoire of the adhesion family of G-protein-
coupled receptors. Genomics. 2004; 84(1):23–33. [PubMed: 15203201]
34. Borzi RM, et al. Chemokines in cartilage degradation. Clinical orthopaedics and related research.
2004; 427(Suppl):S53–61. [PubMed: 15480075]
35. Huang da W, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists
using DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nature protocols. 2009; 4(1):44–57.
36. Salminen HJ, et al. Differential expression patterns of matrix metalloproteinases and their
inhibitors during development of osteoarthritis in a transgenic mouse model. Ann Rheum Dis.
2002; 61(7):591–7. [PubMed: 12079898]
37. Han Y, Lefebvre V. L-Sox5 and Sox6 drive expression of the aggrecan gene in cartilage by
securing binding of Sox9 to a far-upstream enhancer. Mol Cell Biol. 2008; 28(16):4999–5013.
[PubMed: 18559420]
38. Zhu M, et al. Activation of beta-catenin signaling in articular chondrocytes leads to osteoarthritis-
like phenotype in adult beta-catenin conditional activation mice. Journal of bone and mineral
research: the official journal of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research. 2009; 24(1):
12–21. [PubMed: 18767925]
39. Yuasa T, et al. Transient activation of Wnt/{beta}-catenin signaling induces abnormal growth plate
closure and articular cartilage thickening in postnatal mice. The American journal of pathology.
2009; 175(5):1993–2003. [PubMed: 19815716]
40. Kondo N, et al. Intervertebral disc development is regulated by Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. Spine.
2011; 36(8):E513–8. [PubMed: 21270710]
41. Annunen S, et al. An allele of COL9A2 associated with intervertebral disc disease. Science. 1999;
285(5426):409–12. [PubMed: 10411504]
42. Jim JJ, et al. The TRP2 allele of COL9A2 is an age-dependent risk factor for the development and
severity of intervertebral disc degeneration. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2005; 30(24):2735–42.
[PubMed: 16371896]
43. Higashino K, et al. The alpha2 type IX collagen tryptophan polymorphism is associated with the
severity of disc degeneration in younger patients with herniated nucleus pulposus of the lumbar
spine. Int Orthop. 2007; 31(1):107–11. [PubMed: 16586133]
44. Seki S, et al. Association study of COL9A2 with lumbar disc disease in the Japanese population. J
Hum Genet. 2006; 51(12):1063–7. [PubMed: 17024315]
45. Kawaguchi Y, et al. Association between an aggrecan gene polymorphism and lumbar disc
degeneration. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1999; 24(23):2456–60. [PubMed: 10626307]
46. Solovieva S, et al. Association between the aggrecan gene variable number of tandem repeats
polymorphism and intervertebral disc degeneration. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2007; 32(16):1700–5.
[PubMed: 17632389]
47. Cong L, et al. Association between the expression of aggrecan and the distribution of aggrecan
gene variable number of tandem repeats with symptomatic lumbar disc herniation in Chinese Han
of Northern China. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2010; 35(14):1371–6. [PubMed: 20505571]
48. Mashayekhi F, et al. Lumbar disk degeneration disease and aggrecan gene polymorphism in
northern Iran. Biochem Genet. 2010; 48(7–8):684–9. [PubMed: 20496110]
49. Seki S, et al. A functional SNP in CILP, encoding cartilage intermediate layer protein, is associated
with susceptibility to lumbar disc disease. Nat Genet. 2005; 37(6):607–12. [PubMed: 15864306]
50. Kagan HM, Trackman PC. Properties and function of lysyl oxidase. American journal of
respiratory cell and molecular biology. 1991; 5(3):206–10. [PubMed: 1680355]
51. Kurima K, et al. A member of a family of sulfate-activating enzymes causes murine
brachymorphism. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America. 1998; 95(15):8681–5. [PubMed: 9671738]
Henry et al. Page 15
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 16 ===
52. Faiyaz ul Haque M, et al. Mutations in orthologous genes in human spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia and the brachymorphic mouse. Nature genetics. 1998; 20(2):157–62. [PubMed:
9771708]
53. Nakamura Y, et al. Wwp2 is essential for palatogenesis mediated by the interaction between Sox9
and mediator subunit 25. Nature communications. 2011; 2:251.
54. Lyons G, Eisenstein SM, Sweet MB. Biochemical changes in intervertebral disc degeneration.
Biochim Biophys Acta. 1981; 673(4):443–53. [PubMed: 7225426]
55. Watanabe H, et al. Dwarfism and age-associated spinal degeneration of heterozygote cmd mice
defective in aggrecan. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997; 94(13):6943–7. [PubMed: 9192671]
56. Hou B, et al. The polycystic kidney disease 1 (Pkd1) gene is required for the responses of
osteochondroprogenitor cells to midpalatal suture expansion in mice. Bone. 2009; 44(6):1121–33.
[PubMed: 19264154]
57. Harteneck C, Reiter B. TRP channels activated by extracellular hypo-osmoticity in epithelia.
Biochemical Society transactions. 2007; 35(Pt 1):91–5. [PubMed: 17233610]
58. Guilak F, Leddy HA, Liedtke W. Transient receptor potential vanilloid 4: The sixth sense of the
musculoskeletal system? Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 2010; 1192:404–9.
[PubMed: 20392266]
59. Rock MJ, et al. Gain-of-function mutations in TRPV4 cause autosomal dominant brachyolmia.
Nature genetics. 2008; 40(8):999–1003. [PubMed: 18587396]
60. Lamande SR, et al. Mutations in TRPV4 cause an inherited arthropathy of hands and feet. Nature
genetics. 2011; 43(11):1142–6. [PubMed: 21964574]
61. Soranzo N, et al. Meta-analysis of genome-wide scans for human adult stature identifies novel Loci
and associations with measures of skeletal frame size. PLoS genetics. 2009; 5(4):e1000445.
[PubMed: 19343178]
62. Liu JZ, et al. Genome-wide association study of height and body mass index in Australian twin
families. Twin research and human genetics: the official journal of the International Society for
Twin Studies. 2010; 13(2):179–93. [PubMed: 20397748]
63. Zhao J, et al. The role of height-associated loci identified in genome wide association studies in the
determination of pediatric stature. BMC medical genetics. 2010; 11:96. [PubMed: 20546612]
64. Palmgren T, et al. Immunohistochemical demonstration of sensory and autonomic nerve terminals
in herniated lumbar disc tissue. Spine. 1996; 21(11):1301–6. [PubMed: 8725920]
65. Freemont AJ, et al. Nerve ingrowth into diseased intervertebral disc in chronic back pain. Lancet.
1997; 350(9072):178–81. [PubMed: 9250186]
Henry et al. Page 16
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 17 ===
Figure 1.
Skeletal phenotype of mice in which the Sox9 gene is disrupted during postnatal growth.
Faxitron X-ray and microCT of 4-month-old mice injected with tamoxifen at 6 weeks. A)
Left: X-ray of control Sox9flox/flox mouse; right: X-ray of Sox9Δ/Δ mouse. Arrow points to
kyphosis of the cervical region of the spine. B) MicroCT of Sox9flox/flox femur C) MicroCT
of Sox9Δ/Δ femur. Arrow points to loss of trabecular bone in the epiphysis of femur
underneath the primary spongiosa.
Henry et al. Page 17
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 18 ===
Figure 2.
Growth plate examined by histology, proliferation, and cell death assays in postnatal Sox9-
depleted mice. Panels A-D) 6-week-old tibial-femoral joint stained with Safranin-O/Fast
Green from mice injected with tamoxifen at 3 weeks. A) Sox9flox/flox B) Sox9Δ/Δ mouse C)
Sox9flox/flox insert D) Sox9Δ/Δ mouse, some cells have flattened morphology, see insert.
Panels E,F) BrdU stained section from 4-week-old mouse injected with tamoxifen at 3
weeks. E) Sox9flox/flox insert F) Sox9Δ/Δ, arrow points to hypocellularity in prehypertrophic
zone Panels G,H) Sections of growth plate stained with TUNEL. G) Sox9flox/flox H) TUNEL
positive cells detected in Sox9Δ/Δ mouse. I) Bar graph showing number of cells (N) on the
Y-axis in a 1000 micron width across the growth plate. BrdU- Sox9flox/flox N=114, Sox9Δ/Δ
N=33; TUNEL- Sox9flox/flox N=0, Sox9Δ/Δ N=144 with standard deviation. Panels J,K)
Indirect immunofluorescent staining of a 5-week-old growth plate section with antibody
LC3B from mice injected with tamoxifen at 3 weeks. White arrow points to LC3B ectopic
expression in the growth plate in panel K.
Henry et al. Page 18
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 19 ===
Figure 3.
Growth plate characterized with indirect immunofluorescence in Sox9 depleted mice. Panels
A–N: Growth plate of 25 day-old day animals that were injected previously with tamoxifen
at 18 days. Sox9 immunostaining in Sox9flox/flox (A), and Sox9Δ/Δ (B). C,D) Merged dual
immunofluorescence with nuclear staining Sox9 (red) and extracellular matrix (ECM)
staining of Collagen II (green) in Sox9flox/flox (C) and Sox9Δ/Δ (D). Collagen IX
immunostaining in Sox9flox/flox (E) and Sox9Δ/Δ (F). G,H) Merged dual
immunofluorescence staining with a Collagen X antibody (red) and DAPI nuclear acid stain
(blue) in Sox9flox/flox (G) and Sox9Δ/Δ (H). Aggrecan immunostaining in Sox9flox/flox (I)
and Sox9Δ/Δ (J). Link protein immunostaining in Sox9flox/flox (K) and Sox9Δ/Δ (L).
ADAMTS5 immunostaining in femoral growth plate with weak expression in reserve zone
(arrow) in Sox9flox/flox (M) and stronger immunostaining in Sox9Δ/Δ (N). Panels O,P)
Histological sections from the growth plate of 21 day-old day animals that were injected
previously with tamoxifen at 18 days. Dual indirect immunofluorescence immunostaining
with a Collagen Type I antibody (red) and Collagen Type X antibody (green) in Sox9flox/flox
(O) and Sox9Δ/Δ (P). Ectopic Collagen Type I protein is detected in ECM of
prehypertrophic zone in Sox9Δ/Δ growth plate (arrow, P). Abbreviations: po-primary
ossification, gp- growth plate, so- secondary ossification.
Henry et al. Page 19
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 20 ===
Figure 4.
Articular cartilage stained with Safranin-O/Fast Green in postnatal Sox9 depleted mice.
A,B) Sections from 4-month-old mice injected with tamoxifen at 6 weeks. A) Sox9flox/flox
B) Sox9Δ/Δ Loss of Saf-O staining in uncalcified articular cartilage above the tidemark
(arrow). Panels C–F) Knee sections from 18-month-old mice injected with tam at 6 months.
C) Sox9flox/flox D) Magnified view of articular cartilage Sox9flox/flox E) Sox9Δ/Δ F)
Magnified view of articular cartilage Sox9Δ/Δ. Saf-O staining is reduced in the uncalcified
articular cartilage above the tidemark (arrow).
Henry et al. Page 20
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 21 ===
Figure 5.
Articular cartilage characterized with immunohistochemistry and indirect
immunofluorescence in postnatal Sox9 depleted mice. A–D) Sections of the articular
cartilage from 5-month-old mice injected with tam. at 2 months. A) Sox9 immunostaining in
uncalcified cartilage above the tidemark Sox9flox/flox B) Loss of Sox9 immunostaining in
articular cartilage Sox9Δ/Δ C,D)- Dual indirect immunofluorescence with a Sox9 antibody
(red) and a Collagen Type II antibody (green) of Sox9flox/flox (C) and Sox9Δ/Δ mouse (D).
E,F) Sections of the articular cartilage from 9-week-old mice injected with tam. at 8 weeks
E) Aggrecan immunostaining in the territorial ECM of Sox9flox/flox mouse F) Aggrecan
levels in the territorial matrix reduced, Sox9Δ/Δ Panels G–L) Sections of the knee joint from
5 month-old mice injected with tam at 3 months. Aggrecan immunostaining Sox9flox/flox (G)
and Sox9Δ/Δ mouse (H) Aggrecan is lost from the surface articular cartilage above the
tidemark. ADAMTS5 immunostaining Sox9flox/flox (I) and stronger ADAMTS5
immunostaining Sox9Δ/Δ (J). Immunostaining with an anti-aggrecan neoepitope antibody,
NITEGE, in Sox9flox/flox (K) and Sox9Δ/Δ (L). Panels M–P) Sections of the knee joint from
5-month-old mice injected with tamoxifen at 3 months. and subjected to indirect
immunofluorescence with an anti-decorin antibody. M) Weak decorin immunostaining
surface articular cartilage Sox9flox/flox mouse N) Strong Decorin immunostaining in
Sox9Δ/Δ articular cartilage. Lubricin immunostaining intensity is similar in Sox9flox/flox (O)
and Sox9Δ/Δ (P).
Henry et al. Page 21
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 22 ===
Figure 6.
Vertebral column of adult Sox9 depleted mice. Spines from 6-month-old animals injected
with tam. at 4 months. A) Faxitron of Sox9flox/flox mouse (left) and Sox9Δ/Δ mouse (right).
Arrow points to an empty space visualized in the X-ray, and presumably the intervertebral
disc (IVD). B,C) MicroCT of the lumbar vertebrae 3 and 4 (L3/L4) in the Sox9flox/flox
mouse (B) and Sox9Δ/Δ mouse (C). The IVD (L3/L4) is depicted as the empty space shown
with a red arrow (top) and white arrow (bottom). Compression of IVD Sox9Δ/Δ D) Von
Kossa staining of L4/L5 vertebra in Sox9flox/flox mouse. Black arrows point to vertebrae
growth plate E) Von Kossa staining of lumbar 4/5 vertebra in Sox9Δ/Δ mouse.
Henry et al. Page 22
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 23 ===
Figure 7.
Histological sections of lumbar intervertebral disc. A–D) IVD from 3 month-old injected
with tam. at 2 months. A) Indirect immunofluorescence with anti-Sox9 antibody
Sox9flox/flox B) Sox9 antibody (red nuclear) and Collagen Type II antibody (green ECM) of
Sox9flox/flox C) Sox9 immunostaining, Sox9Δ/Δ D) Sox9 antibody (red) and Collagen Type
II antibody (green), Sox9Δ/Δ mouse. E,F) Saf-O/Fast Green sections 10 week-old injected
with tam. at 8 weeks. E) Sox9flox/flox F) Sox9Δ/Δ G,H) Saf-O/Fast Green sections 12 week-
old injected with tam. at 8 weeks G) Sox9flox/flox H) Sox9Δ/Δ I,J) Immunohistochemistry
with anti-aggrecan antibody of 10 week-old mice injected with tam. 8 weeks I) Sox9flox/flox
J) Sox9Δ/Δ Aggrecan depletion in IVD, but aggrecan detected in growth plate, correlating
with the Saf-O levels observed in G,H. Panels K,L) Saf-O/Fast Green 8 month-old mice
injected with tam. at 6 months of age. K) Sox9flox/flox L) Sox9Δ/Δ
Henry et al. Page 23
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
=== PAGE 24 ===
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
Henry et al. Page 24
Table 1
Table of 14 of the most downregulated (Top) and upregulated genes (Bottom) upon the postnatal depletion of Sox9 in the adult mouse intervertebral disk.
Down-Regulated
Gene Symbol log2(Fold Change) Fold Change
Col10a1 −4.83 23.31
Col9a1 −4.53 20.48
Matn3 −4.20 17.62
Ucma −3.91 15.27
Rspo4 −3.74 13.95
Col9a3 −3.46 11.97
AA465934 −3.19 10.16
Col2a1 −2.98 8.89
Col9a2 −2.97 8.82
Clec3a −2.83 7.99
Sfrp5 −2.79 7.81
Fxyd2 −2.77 7.67
Cytl1 −2.71 7.36
Grem1 −2.70 7.31
Ppp1r1b −2.59 6.70
Up-Regulated
Gene Symbol log2(Fold Change) Fold Change
Dbh 6.49 42.12
Cadps 5.26 27.66
Syt1 5.13 26.35
Ucp1 5.07 25.69
Syt4 4.79 22.95
Scg2 4.52 20.45
Rab3c 4.47 19.94
Ddc 4.37 19.06
Mpo 4.32 18.63
Retnlg 4.30 18.50
Elane 3.99 15.94
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.
=== PAGE 25 ===
$watermark-text $watermark-text $watermark-text
Henry et al. Page 25
Down-Regulated
Gene Symbol log2(Fold Change) Fold Change
Cxcr2 3.99 15.91
Slc27a2 3.79 14.34
Ppbp 3.67 13.47
J Bone Miner Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2013 December 01.