=== PAGE 1 ===
Copyright 1980 by The Journal of Bone and Join: Surgery, incorporated
740 ThE JOURNAL OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
Diffusion in the Various Zones of the
Normal and the Rachitic Growth Plate*
BY JOHN E. STAMBAUGH, V.M.D., PH.D.t, AND
CARL T. BRIGHTON, M.D., PH.D.t, PHILADELPHIA, PENNSYLVANIA
From the Department of Orthopedic Surgery. University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia
ABSTRACT: Calcification of the intercellular matrix
of the growth plate may make the matrix relatively im-
permeable to metabohites, and may lead to the death of
the hypertrophic chondrocytes in the zone of calcifica-
tion of the epiphyseal plate. We tested this hypothesis
by measuring the diffusion coefficients of :IHinuhin and
‘4C-sucrose by a desorption technique in slices of
growth-plate cartilage from normal rabbits, normal
rats, rachitic rats, and healing rachitic rats. In the
normal rabbit the diffusion coefficients for :IHinuhin
and ‘ 4C-sucrose were lowest in the zone of hyper-
trophic cells and increased progressively through the
proliferative zone, reserve zone, and hyaline cartilage.
In the animals with rickets, the diffusion coefficient of
3H-inuhin in the hypertrophic cell zone was greatly in-
creased and it returned toward normal with healing of
the disease. The results of the diffusion studies were
correlated with the following parameters: per cent ma-
trix based on volume, hexosamine content, hy-
droxyprohine content, per cent water, per cent dry
matter, per cent ash based on wet weight, and ash as
per cent of dry matter. Continuous simple linear-
regression analysis revealed that ash content was the
one parameter that correlated best with the diffusion
coefficients calculated from all of the desorption
studies. These results suggest that calcification of carti-
lage matrix significantly inhibits diffusion of nutrients
to the growth-plate chondrocytes.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The medical treatment of
disorders of enchondral ossification must be based on
an understanding of the etiology and pathogenesis of
these disorders, which must be based in turn on knowl-
edge of how the physiological events involved in normal
enchondral ossification are altered in disease states.
The studies described in this report evaluate the rela-
tionship between two events occurring during en-
chondral ossification: calcification of intercellular ma-
trix in the zone of the hypertrophic chondrocytes, and
death of the hypertrophic chondrocytes. The results of
these studies suggest that decreased diffusion of nutri-
ents to the last hypertrophic chondrocytes, due to cal-
* Supported in part by National Institutes of Health Grant AM
13812, United States Public Health Service.
1 Department of Orthopedic Surgery. University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 36th and Hamilton WalkIG2, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19174.
cification of the intercellular matrix, may be an impor-
tant factor contributing to the death of the hyper-
trophic chondrocytes.
The phenomenon of endochondral ossification de-
pends on the function of a highly ordered arrangement of
chondrocytes and intercellular matrix in the epiphyseal
plate. Based primarily on the morphological characteris-
tics of chondrocytes, the growth plate may be defined as
having the following zones: ( 1) zone of small-size cells
(reserve zone), (2) zone of cell columns (zone of prolifer-
ation), and (3) zone of cell hypertrophy (upper one-third,
zone of maturation; middle one-third, zone of degenera-
tion; and lower one-third, zone of provisional calcifica-
tion)’8 Marked changes in morphological properties of
the cell2’240, enzyme profiles26’27, composition of carti-
lage matrix9314 7,01.21.30:31,46, and mineral content30 are
distinguished as one passes from one zone of the growth
plate to another. Moreover, the chondrocytes that arise at
the top of the zone of cell columns undergo a complex
life-cycle which ultimately ends in the death and resorp-
tion of the cell at the bottom of the hypertrophic
zone2-222t. Hamla noted that since no capillaries are pres-
ent in typical hyaline cartilage, it must be nourished by
diffusion through the intercellular substance within which
the chondrocytes are found. Any circumstances that render
the cartilage matrix relatively impermeable could thereby
adversely affect the nutrition of the chondrocytes. Ham
proposed that as the intercellular matrix becomes calcified
in the zone of hypertrophic cells, the cartilage matrix is
rendered relatively impermeable and the chondrocytes are
deprived of nutrition and cannot rid themselves of waste
products. As a result of this stagnation effect, the chon-
drocytes die. This basic thesis has been supported by many
authors2-16’375 and contested by Holtrop’TM.
This study was undertaken to determine the diffusion
coefficients in the various zones of the growth plate. A de-
sorption technique was used to determine the diffusion
coefficients of two relatively low-molecular-weight, ex-
tracellular, non-ionic substances: :IHinulin and C-
sucrose. An attempt was made to correlate the diffusion
coefficients in the various zones of the growth plate with
the degree of calcification (ash content), per cent matrix
based on volume, hexosamine content, hydroxyproline
content, per cent water, and per cent dry matter in each

=== PAGE 2 ===
k’ 
.s 
43.l.
i , .
,.t
lation platform to be moved accurately in increments as small as two micrometers.
Each epiphyseal plate was mounted on the translation platform and the stage was
positioned so that the lowered cutting blade just touched the exposed surface of the
hypertrophic zone. The blade was raised and the stage was advanced 150 mi-
crometers. A wafer was cut by manually lowering the blade. The first wafer was
subsequently shown by histological study to consist of only cartilage from the
hypertrophic zone (Fig. 3-A). A second wafer, 150 micrometers thick. was cut and
discarded. The third wafer, which was of the same thickness as the previous Iwo,
-- represented cartilage from the middle portion of the zone of cell columns (Fig.
3-B). The translation stage was further advanced to the macroscopic groove of
Ranvier and a fourth wafer was cut. This wafer was shown to be derived from the
zone ofsmall-size cells (Fig. 3-C). A fifth wafer was cut and discarded, and finally
a sixth wafer of non-growth-plate rib-hyaline cartilage origin (henceforth referred
to as hyaline cartilage) was excised (Fig. 3.D). Random hisiological preparations
S #{149}  of these wafers from the various zones of the growth plate revealed that these
‘ a  techniques allowed consistent separation of the various zones of the growth plate
. S into 150-micrometer-thick wafers, and any slight differences in thickness could be
attributed to random errors.
Other wafers were excised from the hypertrophic zone and the hyaline carti-
lage of fifty-eight-day-old male Sprague-Dawley rats (body weight, 225 grams). A
procedure similar to that used in the rabbit was employed to excise the wafers. The
slices from the hypertrophic zone were cut as in the rabbit. However, after the first
wafer was excised. the specimen was advanced to just beyond the macroscopic
groove of Ranvier and a wafer of hyaline cartilage was excised. Rachitic animals
were prepared by feeding normal forty-eight-day-old male Sprague-Dawley rats
(body weight. 175 grams) a rachitogenic test diet (General Biochemical, Chagrin
Falls, Ohio) and tap water for seventeen to twenty days. After this regimen. the
zone of hypertrophic cells was almost twice the normal thickness. To accommo-
. . S
. a ,I #{149} #{149}
. i:.. #{149}#{149}
.    . 
#{149}j._
 S
.y’ 
:Ihl..#{149}ii;4:P.::: 
  - *. .
. .  ‘ ,.-
.#{149}  ‘.  _
FIG. 3-C
p  
, ‘‘
.s.. . 
.
 .4
FIG. 2 FIG. 3-D
741
VOL. 62-A, NO. 5. JULY 1980
DIFFUSION IN THE VARIOUS ZONES OF THE GROWTH PLATE
zone. The diffusion coefficient of :lHinulin in uncalcified
epiphyseal cartilage (growth-plate cartilage of rachitic
rats) was compared with the coefficients in normal rats and
in healing rachitic rats. Results indicate that the diffusion
coefficients for the substances studied decreased as the
bone-cartilage junction was approached, and ash content
was the one parameter that correlated best with the diffu-
sion coefficients.
Experimental Procedure
Preparation of Slices or Wafers of the
Various Zones 01 the Growth Plate
The ribs of six-week-old male New Zealand white rabbits were excised, freed
of soft tissue, and immersed in tissue-culture medium (Eagle minimum essential
medium, NCTC 135, supplemented with 15 per cent heat-inactivated fetal calf
serum). By subsequently applying a mild transverse bending force to the bone-
cartilage junction. it was possible to accurately remove the metaphysis at the bot-
torn of the zone of hypertrophic cells (Fig. I).
A precision guillotine.type cutting device was designed to cut slices or wafers
of cartilage in a plane perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the growth plate
(Fig. 2). A Lansing Translation Stage (Model 20. 125, Lansing Research Instru-
ments, Ithaca, New York) was fitted with a micrometer head that allowed the trans-
. ..
,1  
 -
M’ -
FIG. 1
Photomicrograph of the plane of cleavage between the remaining zone
ofhypertrophic cells and the metaphysis (hematoxylin and eosin, X 20).
Front view of guillotine cutting device. Note the rabbit growth plate
positioned in the clamp in the center of the translation stage.
. _4#{149}_..  ,#{149}i1;t;
- . .‘   :.. 
r:’ . .; ; ?‘C.. .- #{182}%#{149}.#{149}‘
FIG. 3-A
.. ./- : .
--  :1% “:‘,‘   ‘ ..1 .- .
.*._ . C #{149} ‘3..- .-
- :  #{149}.:. :   -#--k-
 .--‘“
FIG. 3-B
Figs. 3-A through 3-D: Photomicrographs of wafers of cartilage from
the rabbit growth plate (hematoxylin and eosin, x 20).
Fig. 3-A: Hyaline cartilage.
Fig. 3-B: Small-size cell zone.
Fig. 3-C: Middle of zone of cell columns.
Fig. 3-D: Hypertrophic zone.

=== PAGE 3 ===
ThE JOURNAL OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
742 J. E. STAMBAUGH AND C. T. BRIGHTON
date this alteration in the architecture of the growth plate, it was necessary to first
cut 100 micrometersof hypertrophic cell cartilage from the rib cartilage after it was
mounted on the guillotine apparatus. This was followed by the same cutting proce-
dure described for the normal rat. Healing rachitic rats were prepared by subjecting
rachitic animals to a treatment regimen of oral vitamin D2 (Winthrop Laboratories,
New York. N.Y.) and intraperitoneal injections of a phosphate solution as de-
scribed by Simon et al. .The same technique described for the normal rat was
used to excise wafers from the hypertrophic cell zone and the hyaline cartilage of
the healing rachitic animals.
Diffusion Techniques
Inulin and sucrose appear to meet all the criteria previously outlined for the
solutes to be used in these studies (low molecular weight, extracellular, and non-
ionic). It is generally accepted that inulin is confined to the extracellular space of
tissue25. However, sucrose has been shown to occupy a volume in tissue greater
than the calculated space for ‘“ .This larger volume of distribution for su-
crose is thought to be due to slow cellular penetration of the disacchatide. How-
ever. it has been shown that after the addition of 3 x l03-molar phlorhizin to the
incubation medium, the spaces for sucrose and inulin become identical. This effect
is probably due to a phlorhizin-mediated inhibition of sucrose penetration of
cells30. Therefore, all tissue-culture medium used in the sucrose experiments had a
3 x l03-molar phlorhizin concentration.
The diffusion technique used in these experiments is an adaptation of the
method employing sorption-desorption from a plane sheet8. With this technique
the following was assumed: ( 1) the plane sheet of material was so thin that effec-
tively all the diffusing substance entered through the plane faces and a negligible
amount, through the edges; (2) the diffusion coefficient was constant; (3) the plane
sheet did not change its thickness during the experiment (that is. it did not swell or
shrink); and (4) the plane sheet was homogeneous in structure. The first assumption
seemed to be the source of the greatest possible error, although the implications of
the fourth assumption cannot be overlooked either. As long as the ratio of wafer
thickness to wafer radius was much less than one, any possible error associated
with the first assumption was .The validity of the third assumption was
confirmed experimentally. Based on these and other assumptions. Crank8 e-
sented the following solution of the diffusion equations for desorption from a plane
sheet:
M, 8  I
___= -  exp[-D(2m+ 1)2ii’2t/L2l
M,, 2 m-o (2m + 1)2
where M, is total amount of diffusing substance remaining in the plane sheet at
time t; M, is the equilibrium amount of diffusing substance in the plane sheet at-
tamed theoretically after infinite time before any desorption has occurred; m is
zero and any integer from one to #{176}o(infinity); D is the diffusion coefficient; L is
the thickness of the plane sheet; and t is time. When M,/M. = 0.5, the equation
may be reduced, approximately, to the following simple equation:
0.049
D=
Therefore, if the half-time of the desorption of a solute were observed experimen-
tally. it would be possible to calculate the diffusion coefficient for the substance
from Equation 2. Further details regarding the diffusion equations and the theoreti-
cal basis of this technique were described by Crank’. The initial step in the experi-
mental protocol was to determine the diameter of the wafer by means of an eye-
piece reticule , and from this value the area of the plane surface was calculated.
Each cartilage wafer was then equilibrated overnight at 4 degrees Celsius in one
milliliter of radioactive culture medium which was labeled as follows: (1) 3H-inulin
rabbit studies - one microcurie per milliliter of 3H-inulin (0.505 millicurie per
milligram, New England Nuclear); (2) ‘4C-sucrose rabbit studies - one microcurie
per milliliter of ‘4C-sucrose (0.013 millicurie per milligram, New England Nu-
clear); and (3) 3H-inulin rat studies - two microcuries per milliliter of3H-inulin. It
was demonstrated experimentally that this incubation protocol produced equilibra-
tion of the cartilage extracellular fluid. Each wafer was then sequentially incubated
in a series of ten culture tubes with one-half milliliter of unlabeled tissue-culture
medium for the following intervals: 2.5 seconds, five seconds, ten seconds, thirty
seconds, sixty seconds , two minutes, three minutes, seven minutes, twelve mm-
utes, and twenty minutes. The radioactivity in each culture tube and the wafer at
the end of the experiment was assessed by counting in a liquid scintillation-count-
ing spectrometer (Intertechnique. Model SL-3). From this liquid scintillation-
counting data the total counts per minute per square millimeter in the cartilage
wafer when time = 0 during the experiment (M.). as well as the counts per minute
per square millimeter that remained in the wafer at the end of each cumulative in-
cubation period (M ) were calculated. Therefore, the proportion of the counts per
minute per square millimeter (M,IM,) that remained in the wafer at the end of each
cumulative incubation could be determined and plotted against tIlL. From this
graph, the value of t4fL for M,/M, = 0.500 could be ascertained and the diffusion
coefficient could be calculated (Fig. 4). The term t/L was used in plotting the de-
sorption data because it has been ‘ that the solution of the diffusion
equations for the case of diffusion into an infinite medium where the diffusing sub-
stance is initially confined to the region x < 0 involves a dimensionless parameter
containing tI/L. Therefore, the amount of diffusing substance entering the medium
through unit area of its surface varies as the square root of time, and the desorption
plots were constructed accordingly. The essence ofthe experiment was to allow the
equilibration of the extracellular fluid in the cartilage wafer with a radioactively
labeled solute in culture medium and then to follow the desorption of the radioac-
tive label into an infinite volume (that is, relative to the extracellular space of the
wafer) of unlabeled medium.
Vital straining was used to check the viability of chondrocytes in cartilage
wafers that had been stored overnight in tissue-culture medium at 4 degrees Cel-
sius. The wafers were removed from the culture medium and immersed in 0. 14 per
cent methylene blue for five seconds. They were subsequently rinsed with normal
saline and viewed under a compound microscope at a magnification of 250.
Semilogarithmic plots of the diffusion data obtained from both the rabbit and
rat were constructed to determine if the desorption experiments conformed to a
single or multicompartmental system. In addition, the diffusion data were sub-
jected to an exponential curve-fitting computer analysis to determine the exponen-
tial equations that fit the desorption curves.
Morphological and Biochemical Determinations
The parameters with which the diffusion coefficients were correlated are the
following: (1) percentage of the wafer taken up by cartilage matrix, based on vol-
ume; (2) proteoglycan content, as assessed by hexosamine levels; (3) collagen con-
tent, as estimated by hydroxyproline levels; (4) per cent water and dry matter in
each zone; and (5) per cent ash based on wet weight and ash as a percentage of
dry-matter weight in each region.
The per cent matrix, based on volume, in the wafers from each region of the
growth plate was determined by a point-counting technique2’. This determination
was done for both the sagittal and frontal sections for each of the four types of
wafers obtained from the rabbits, and a total of fourteen determinations was made
for each.
An experiment was conducted to determine whether detectable amounts of
hexosamine residues were leached from the cartilage wafers during their overnight
equilibration with the radioactive acer at 4 degrees Celsius. Two milliliters of
tissue-culture medium with no phenol red was added to each of twenty culture
tubes (twelve by seventy-five millimeters, Falcon Plastics). Into each of ten of
these culture tubes the cartilage of a complete rabbit growth plate, which had been
sliced into ISO-micrometer-thick wafers, was deposited (that is, about twelve mil-
ligrams wet weight of cartilage). The remaining ten tubes served as controls. The
entire group of twenty tubes was stored overnight at 4 degrees Celsius, and sub-
sequently a one-milliliter aliquot of tissue-culture medium was removed. The
(1) hexosamine content was then assayed by the method of Gatt and Berman iO
The hexosamine level in each zone of the rabbit growth plate was ascertained
by determining the wet weight of two wafers from each zone and assaying the
hexosamine by the method already described. A total of fourteen determinations
was made for each of the four zones and the results were expressed on an organic-
matter basis. Hydroxyproline levels were determined similarly, using the tech-
nique of Kivirikko et al.24.
To determine the per cent water, dry matter, ash, and ash as a per cent of dry
matter, twenty-eight wafers from each region were excised and pooled into their
respective groups. The entire pool oftwenty-eight wafers was blotted dry, weighed
(2) in a tared crucible for the wet weight, and then lyophilized overnight. The crucible
was re-weighed to determine dry weight and then the cartilage was reduced to ash
overnight at 600 degrees Celsius in a muffle furnace in order to determine the rain-
cmi content of each zone. Seven determinations were made for each zone.
All experimental protocols for the normal, rachitic, and healing rachitic rats
were identical .The techniques to determine the per cent matrix of the wafers cx-
cised from rats were the same as those utilized in the rabbit. The assays for both
hexosamine and hydroxyproline in the rat experiments were similar to those used
for the rabbit except that in the rat studies the wafers were pooled into groups of
four. The parameters ofper cent water, per cent dry matter, per cent ash, and ash as
a per cent of dry matter for rat cartilage were determined by the same methods
utilized for the rabbit except that forty wafers from each region were used in the
determinations for the rat.
The different groups of data from all experiments were analyzed statistically
by the Student t test to determine the significance of the difference between two
sample means, and continuous simple linear regression was used to establish corre-
lations between diffusion coefficients and the various parameters that were
analyzed.
Rabbit Growth Plate
Results
The diffusion coefficients of 3H-inuhin at 4 degrees
Celsius in rabbit growth-plate cartilage evidenced a gen-
era! decrease in magnitude as the bone-cartilage junction
was approached (Fig. 4). The coefficient obtained in the
zone of hypertrophic cells was only 41 per cent of that ob-
tamed in the middle of the region of cell columns , and only
3 1 per cent of that obtained in the zone of small-size carti-
lage cells (Table I and Fig . 8) . Statistical analysis revealed
that the results for the hypertrophic zone were significantly

=== PAGE 4 ===
DIFFUSION IN THE VARIOUS ZONES OF THE GROWTH PLATE 743
TABLE I
DIFFUSION COEFFICIENTS ( X lO SQUARE CENTIMETERS PER SECOND) IN THE FouR REGIONS OF THE RABBIT GROWTH PLATE*
Zone of
Growth Plate
3H-Inulin at
4#{176}Celsiust
Fast Exponential
Curve-Fitting Analysis of
3H-Inulin at 4#{176}Celsiust
3H-Inulin at
22#{176}Celsiust
Q1, Value of
3H-Inulint
‘4C-Sucrose at
4#{176}Celsius
Fast Exponential
Curve-Fitting Analysis of
14C-Sucrose at 4#{176}Celsiust
Hyaline cartilage 1.89 ± O.261
a
1.81 ± 0.18
a
4.06 ± 0.63
a,b
1.64 2.76 ± 0.49
a,b
2.56 ± 0.32
a
Small-size cells 2.02 ± 0.29
a
2.04 ± 0.21
a
5.57 ± 0.95
a,b
1.97 2.39 ± 0.27
a,b
2. 1 1 ± 0.19
a
Middle cell columns 1.51 ± 0.16
a
1.56 ± 0.15
a
2.44 ± 0.18
a,c,d
1.34 1.66 ± 0.13
a,c,d
1.79 ± 0.18
a
Hypertrophic cells 0.62 ± 0.09
b,c,d
0.91 ± 0.15
b,c,d
1.11 ± 0.23
b,c,d
1.43 0.99 ± 0.15
b,c
0.96 ± 0.11
b,c,d
* Values are given as mean ± standard error of the mean.
t a = hypertrophic; b = middle cell columns; c = small-size cells; and d = hyalinecartilage.
1:Result for hyaline cartilage (d) is statistically different at the 95 per cent level from value in hypertrophic zone (a).
different (p < 0.001) from those for other regions. the fast exponential. A similar analysis was done for the
Semilogarithmic plots of the diffusion data for 3H- slow exponential component, but the calculated diffusion
inulin at 4 degrees Celsius in the rabbit revealed that the
inulin appeared to be diffusing out of more than one 1.00   t I
functional extracellular compartment in all zones of the 0.60
epiphyseal plate (Fig. 5). If the inulin were diffusing out o40
of a single compartment, the experimental points would lie
on a straight line in a semilogarithmic plot. When an at-
tempt was made to fit the data with an exponential equa- .!L 0.20
tion of the general form of y = e - Pt/L (where C is M0 0. I 4
the y intercept at t = o and P is the slope of the curve in a 0. I 0 0
semilogarithmic plot), it was impossible to describe a o 06 
curve that closely approximated the experimental results 004
(Fig. 6). However, a two-term exponential equation of the
general form of y = e - Pt/L + C2 e - qt4IL, which
can describe desorption from a multicompartmental sys- 0.02  I L I
tem, fit the experimental data very well (Fig. 7). When the 0 I 0 20 30 40
results for each zone, calculated from the raw expenmen- I “2/L x 02 (SEC”2/CM)
tal data , were compared with those computed on the basis FIG. 5
of the fast exponential (that is, the component of the Semilogarithmic plot of 3H-inulin desorption from a wafer of rabbit
multiple-term exponential that has the greater slope when  plate at 4 degrees Celsius (squares indicate experimental data
plotted), no significant differences were found except in
the hypertrophic zone where the value of the raw data was 
statistically less (p < 0.01) than the result computed for 09 I I I
I .0 - (T”lL)j,3.39 a lO SEC/CM 0.8
0.9 - (T/l - I 1.61 a lO $EC/cM 0. 7
 -:::::v,2
 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 II 2 3 4 T1”2/L x 02 (SEC”2/CM)
T115/L stO (SEC”/CM) FIG. 6
FIG . 4 Comparison of experimental desorption for 3H-inulin in wafer from
Sample plot of 3H-inulin desorption from a wafer of rabbit hyper- rabbit growth plate at 4 degrees Celsius (squares) with best fit of single-
trophic cartilage, and calculation of diffusion coefficient. term exponential equation (solid line).
VOL. 62-A, NO. 5, JULY 1980

=== PAGE 5 ===
I.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0. I
Mt
Id040
T112/L x 02 (SEC”2/CM)
.0
.0
0
I-
Zr-)
uEw
0(0
00
Zx
0
1/)
U-
U-
l.
CARTILAGE CELL ZONE
FIG. 8
COLUMNS ZONE CELL ZONE
744 J. E. STAMBAUGH AND C. T. BRIGHTON
THE JOURNAL OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
coefficients varied so widely that meaningful comparisons
could not be made.
Diffusion coefficients of :iHinulin in the zones of the
rabbit epiphyseal plate at 22 degrees Celsius followed the
same general pattern as that established at 4 degrees Cel-
FIG. 7
Comparison of experimental desorption for :rHinulin in wafer from
rabbit growth plate at 4 degrees Celsius (squares) with two-term expo-
nential equation (solid line).
sius (Table I and Fig. 8). Comparison of the diffusion
coefficients obtained at 4 degrees Celsius for each respec-
tive zone with those at 22 degrees Celsius revealed that the
values for the latter group were statistically larger (p <
0.025) in all zones except the hypertrophic region, where
no significant difference was observed.
The rate of biological reactions increases with tern-
perature up to a maximum. For useful comparisons of the
effects of temperature on the rates of biological processes,
the rates of reaction must be compared for an identical
temperature interval (usually 10 degrees Celsius) and then
the ratio of the rate of activity can be determined. This
ratio is called the Q1’1.Q10values for :rHinulin in these
experiments ranged from a low of 1.34 in the middle of the
region of cell columns to a high of 1 .97 in the zone of
small-size cells (Table I).
The diffusion coefficients for ‘4C-sucrose at 4 degrees
Celsius in the various zones of the rabbit growth plate fol-
lowed the same general pattern as that of the previous cx-
periments but were all slightly larger (although not statisti-
cally) than the corresponding values for inulin (Table I and
Fig. 8). Semilogarithmic plots and exponential curve-
fitting analyses for the ‘4C-sucrose experiments revealed
results similar to those for :tHinulin
Vital staining of the epiphyseal-plate wafers from the
rabbit revealed that well over 95 per cent of the cells ac-
cumulated methylene blue.
No significant difference was observed between the
point-counting data from sagittal sections and those from
frontal sections , and therefore the data from the sagittal
sections were utilized for the subsequent discussion. The
amount of matrix decreased as the bone-cartilage junction
was approached and cartilage matrix accounted for 38 per
cent less volume of the wafer in the zone of hypertrophic
cells than it did in the hyaline cartilage (Table II).
In the proteoglycan-leaching experiment, it was dem-
onstrated that no detectable amounts of hexosamine had
appeared in the tissue-culture medium by the end of the
eighteen-hour period.
The results of the studies of levels of hexosamine and
hydroxyproline, per cent water, and per cent dry matter are
shown in Table II. The ash content of the wafers from the
rabbit growth plate dramatically increased as one passed
from the hyaline cartilage to the zone of hypertrophic
cells (Table II). In the case of ash as per cent of dry matter,
Graph illustrating differences in diffusion coefficients between the four regions of the rabbit growth plate.

=== PAGE 6 ===
FIG. 9
Comparison of diffusion coefficients in normal, rachitic, and healing rachitic rats.
DIFFUSION IN THE VARIOUS ZONES OF THE GROWTH PLATE 745
VOL. 62-A, NO. 5. JULY 1980
TABLE II
RESULTS OF MORPHOLOG ICAL AND Btoc HEMICAL ANALY SES IN THE FOU R REGIONS OF THE RABBIT ROWTH PLATE5
Zone of
Growth Plate
Per Cent Matrix
(Sagittal Sections)t
Per Cent
Watert
Per Cent
Dry Mattert
Asht
Hexosaminet HydroxyprolinettPer Cent Per Cent of Dry Matter
Hyaline cartilage 88.9 ± 0.3k
a.b.c
80.7 ± 0.9
a.b.c
19.3 ± 0.9
a.b.c
0.6 ± 0.2
a,b
3.1 ± 1.0
a,b,c
141.3 ± 6.8
a
19.96 ± 1.06
a.b.c
Small-size cells 85.0 ± 0.7
a,b,d
84.2 ± 0.7
a,b,d
15.8 ± 0.8
a,b,d
1.0 ± 0.1
a
6.3 ± 0.8
a,d
159.6 ± 10.3
a
16.60 ± 0.86
a.b.c
Middle cell columns 73.2 ± 1.2
a,c,d
87.3 ± 0.5
c,d
12.7 ± 0.5
c,d
1.2 ± 0.1
a,d
9.8 ± 1.3
a,d
150.1 ± 10.2
a
7.26 ±0.70
c,d
Hypertrophic cells 55.0 ± 1.4
b,c,d
87.5 ± 0.5
c,d
12.5 ± 0.5
c,d
3.0 ± 0.1
b,c,d
24.4 ± 1.9
b,c,d
206.1 ± 17.1
b,c,d
6.51 ± 0.68
c,d
S Values are given as mean ± standard error of the mean.
1a = hypertrophic; b - middle cell columns; c small-size cells; and d hyaline cartilage.
1:Micrograms per milligram of organic matter.
§ Result from hyaline cartilage (d) is statistically different at the 95 per cent level from values in hypertrophic (a), middle cell columns (b), and small-size cell
zones (c).
the hypertrophic zone showed an eightfold increase in ash
compared with the hyaline cartilage.
Analysis of the coefficients of correlation for the
rabbit experiments revealed that per cent matrix, per cent
ash , and ash as per cent of dry matter were the parameters
that correlated best with the diffusion results.
Rat Growth Plate
The diffusion coefficient of 3H-inulin at 4 degrees
Celsius in the hypertrophic zones of the normal rat growth
plate was only 15 and 56 per cent of the value from the
comparable regions in the rachitic and healing rachitic
animals, respectively (Table III and Fig. 9). Semilog-
arithmic plots and exponential curve-fitting analyses for
data derived from the rat studies revealed the same results
as in the rabbit experiments.
It should be noted that no significant difference was
observed between the diffusion coefficients in the zones of
hypertrophic cells and hyaline cartilage of the rabbit
growth plate and the normal rat growth plate.
No significant difference was observed between the
0
,.
Z
-J
2
±
rfl
20
U.. x
 2.i
U
2
0
C’)
:2
U-
U-
0
point-counting data from the sagittal sections and those
from the frontal sections in any of the rat preparations,
and the per cent matrix in the hypertrophic cell and hya-
line cartilage zones changed very little from one animal
preparation to another (Table III).
The results of the hexosamine, hydroxyproline, per
cent water, and per cent dry matter studies for the rat ex-
penments are shown in Table III. No significant differ-
ences were observed between the per cent ash and ash as
per cent of dry matter for wafers of hyaline cartilage from
the various rat preparations. However, the per cent ash and
ash as per cent of dry matter in the hypertrophic cell wa-
fers of rachitic rats were only 47 per cent of that found in
the corresponding region of normal rats . There was no
statistical difference between the levels of ash in hyper-
trophic cell wafers of normal and healing rachitic rats
(Table III).
Regression analysis revealed that the parameters that
correlated best with the diffusion coefficients from the rat
studies were hydroxyproline content, per cent ash, and ash

=== PAGE 7 ===
746 J. E. STAMBAUGH AND C. T. BRIGHTON
THE JOURNAL OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
TABLE III
DIFFuSIoN COEFFICIENTS ( X l0 SQUARE CENTIMETERS PER SECOND) AND RESULTS OF MORPHOLOGICAL
AND BIOCHEMICAL ANALYSES IN Two REGIONS OF THE RAT GROWTH PLATE5
Zone of
Growth Plate
3H-Inulin at
4#{176}Celsiust
Per Cent Mathx
(Sagittal Sections)t
Per Cent
Water
Per Cent
Dry Matter
Asht
Hexosaminetl HydroxyprolinetPer Cent Per Cent of Dry Matter
Normal rat 1.55 ± 0.15* 87.2 ± 0.5 79.9 ± 0.8 20.1 ± 0.08 1.2 ± 0.1 6.0 ± 0.4 90.2 ± 6.1 27.74 ± 0.88
Hyaline cartilage f, g g f, g f
Hypertrophic cells 0.71 ± 0.15
f,g
49.2 ± 1.7
g
84.0 ± 0.8 16.0 ± 0.8 3.8 ± 0.3
f
23.4 ± 1.2
f
125.4 ± 6.7
f,g
20.80 ± 1.06
f
Rachitic rat 3.77 ± 0.88 85.6 ± 0.8 78.7 ± 0.7 21.3 ± 0.7 1.4 ± 0.2 6.9 ± 0.7 31.7 ± 1.9 21.01 ± 1.79
Hyaline cartilage e, g g e, g e, g
Hypertrophic cells 4.65 ± 0.95 47.8 ± 1.3 83.0 ± 0.9 17.0 ± 0.9 1.8 ± 0.2 11.1 ± 0.6 34.1 ± 3.8 13.97 ± 0.97
e.g g e,g e,g e.g e.g
Healed rachitic rat 4.20 ± 0.85 84.2 ± 0.7 77.9 ± 0.3 22.0 ± 0.03 1.4 ± 0.1 6.2 ± 0.4 61.9 ± 6.6 26.65 ± 0.87
Hyaline cartilage e e e, f f
Hypertrophic cells 1.27 ± 0.17
e,f
55.7 ± 1.2
e,f
82.9 ± 0.6 17.1 ± 0.6 3.6 ± 0.3
f
20.4 ± 1.3
f
71.9 ± 6.1
e,f
18.45 ± 1.04
f
a Values are given as mean ± standard error of the mean.
t e = normal rat; f = rachitic rat; and g = healed rachitic rat.
t Micrograms per milligram of organic matter.
* Result for hyaline cartilage in normal rat(c) is statistically different at the 95 per centlevel from values in same zone ofrachitic (f) and healed rachitic rats (g).
as per cent of dry matter.
Discussion
The point-counting technique provided a simple and
precise method by which the relative volume of cartilage
matrix in the various wafers excised from the growth plate
could be estimated. One of the fundamental assumptions
underlying this technique is that the structures being
analyzed are randomly distributed in space. In other
words, histological sections taken from the entire gamut of
possible specimen orientations should yield the same re-
suIts. In our studies, the point-counting of the sagittal and
frontal sections of the same specimen of tissue produced
results that had almost identical mean values. Therefore,
this strongly suggests that our values for the per cent ma-
trix are accurate representations of the tissues that were
sampled.
The results of analysis of the hexosamine and hy-
droxyproline in the normal animals as well as in the rachi-
tic and healed rachitic rats are in agreement with published
results 6.io.:tL4i.44
The results reported for the water content and ash as
per cent of dry matter in the various zones of the epiphy-
seal plate of the normal rabbit are also consistent with
previously published results30. In the rat preparations no
significant differences were found between the water con-
tent of corresponding wafers from normal, rachitic, and
healing rachitic animals. This is contrary to the findings of
Kunin and Krane28. They reported that rachitic epiphyseal
cartilage contained 1 1 per cent more water than compara-
ble normal tissue. The cause of this discrepancy is not ap-
parent. The significant decrease of ash content in the
hypertrophic cell zone of rachitic cartilage which was ob-
served in our experiments has been thoroughly docu-
mented in the literature29-47.
In order to interpret better the findings of the diffusion
studies, it was necessary to have some indication of the
viability of the chondrocytes of the cartilage wafers after
the overnight equilibration with the radioactively labeled
tissue-culture medium at 4 degrees Celsius. This assess-
ment was made by vital staining with methylene blue, be-
cause vital stains are accumulated by living cells. The re-
suits of the staining experiments indicated that the great
majority of the chondrocytes remained functional after the
equilibration; therefore, the integrity of the cell membrane
was assumed to be intact. Moreover, the close agreement
between the diffusion coefficients for :iHinulin and ‘4C-
sucrose further strengthens the conclusion that the cell
membrane retained its normal semipermeable properties.
The negative results of the hexosamine-leaching ex-
periment suggested that the loss of glycosaminoglycans
from the cartilage wafers during the overnight equilibra-
tion step of the desorption studies could be discounted as a
complicating factor in the interpretation of the diffusion
studies.
Perhaps the most significant finding of the rabbit
studies was the large decrease in the diffusion coefficient
of :iHinulin in the zone of hypertrophic cells as compared
with that of the other regions . The sernilogarithmic plots
indicated that inulin desorption was occurring from more
than one compartment, although these analyses do not
allow the exact number of compartments to be defined
(Fig. 7). However, it is possible to speculate on the nature
of some of these compartments. Based on the findings of
the vital staining study, which indicated that the vast
majority of chondrocytes remained alive during the de-
sorption experiments, it can be assumed that these various
inulin compartments are confined to the extracellular
space. The matrix distribution in the longitudinal bars of
the growth plate is not identical to that of the transverse
septa and it is possible that these regions correspond to two
different diffusion compartments. Moreover, the relative
increase in the difference between the raw experimental
data for the diffusion coefficients at 4 degrees Celsius of

=== PAGE 8 ===
DIFFUSION IN THE VARIOUS ZONES OF THE GROWTH PLATE 747
VOL.62-A,NO.5.JULY1980
3H-inulin and the coefficients calcalulated from the fast
exponential of the curve-fitting analysis in the hyper-
trophic zone may indicate an increase in the degree of ma-
trix heterogeneity in this region. This alteration could be
due , for example , to a slightly greater relative attenuation
of the transverse septa of the cartilage than of the longitud-
ma! bars in the hypertrophic zone. Additionally, submi-
croscopic areas of matrix heterogeneity may be a factor as
well. By comparing the diffusion coefficients of 3H-inulin
at 4 degrees Celsius with those at 22 degrees Celsius the
Qi  can be calculated . In general , the Q I of enzymatic
reactions ranges from about 1 . 1 to 5 . 3 , and the value for
the physical diffusion of sugars has been  as 1.37.
The Q10 values calculated from the rabbit experiments
were all fairly close to 1.37, with the exception of the val-
ues determined for the zone of cell columns (Table I) . Ex-
perimental error probably accounted for most of the dis-
crepancy in the values calculated from this zone, and we
concluded that these experiments were measuring physical
diffusion processes.
The values for the diffusion coefficients for ‘4C-
sucrose in the various regions of the rabbit growth plate
were all slightly, although not significantly, larger than
the corresponding values for 3H-inulin. This observation
indicates that within the limits of molecular weight and
radius from sucrose to inulin (that is, 342 to 5500 and 5.3
to fifteen angstroms , respectively) molecular size was not
of paramount importance in determining the diffusion be-
havior of non-ionic solutes in the epiphyseal plate.
In the hypertrophic cell zone and the hyaline cartilage
of rachitic animals, the diffusion coefficients were 6.5 and
2.4 times those of the corresponding cartilage from nor-
ma! animals, respectively. Moreover, the hypertrophic
cartilage of the healing rachitic animal showed a dramatic
return of the inulin diffusion coefficient to 1.8 times that
of the normal animal. In the hyaline cartilage, no signifi-
cant changes were produced in the diffusion coefficient
during the process of healing.
It should be emphasized that the correlation analysis
for the rabbit diffusion studies indicated that the per cent
matrix and ash content correlated best with the diffusion
results. However, in the rat experiments, in which the per
cent mathx was relatively constant between the normal,
rachitic, and healing rachitic groups, it was hy-
droxyproline and ash content that had the highest degree of
correlation. Therefore, ash content was the only parameter
analyzed that demonstrated consistent over-all correlation
in all diffusion experiments. Considering the rat studies
alone, the results indicate that some other component (for
example, proteoglycans or collagen, or both) appears to
have played some role in altering the diffusion coefficients
in the rachitic animals. The findings in the healing rachitic
animals tend to reinforce this supposition. The diffusion
coefficients at 22 degrees Celsius for inulin and sucrose in
free solution (that is, through water) have been given as
1.8 x 106 square centimeters per second and 4.8 x 106
square centimeters per second, respectively33. On con-
trasting the coefficient for inulin in free solution with the
corresponding values in rabbit epiphyseal cartilage (Table
I), it can be seen that inulin appeared to be diffusing
through growth-plate cartilage more quickly than it did in
free solution. This discrepancy, most probably due to dif-
ferences in techniques, will complicate comparisons with
other data as well . From studies of model systems of con-
nective tissue it has been concluded that glycosaminogly-
cans have little effect on diffusion of small non-ionic
molecules across an artificial gelatin-agarose
In studies of diffusion in densely cross-linked water-
swollen cellulose gels, it was concluded that the factor
limiting the diffusion coefficients of relatively small sol-
utes in a polymer matrix is the mobility of the solvent in
the gel3’4.
Articular cartilage is the only cartilaginous tissue
whose diffusion properties have been examined sys-
tematically. Maroudas32 studied several physiochemical
properties of articular cartilage on the basis of considering
the cartilage matrix as a typical ion-exchange material,
since it essentially consists of water and a network of
linear polyanions with fixed negative charges. The results
indicated a slight decrease in the diffusion coefficients of
non-ionic solutes when fixed-charge density increased,
and that fixed-charge density was a direct measure of the
proteoglycan content. Moreover, the diffusion coefficients
for inulin and sucrose in articular cartilage were 0.25 x
106 square centimeters per second and 1.3 x 106 square
centimeters per second, respectively33.
The scant and rather diverse experimental results for
diffusion in #{224}artilageand in connective-tissue models
provide some information pertinent to the findings in
epiphyseal-plate cartilage. From the data discussed, it ap-
pears that proteoglycans have little importance in deter-
mining the effective diffusion coefficient for relatively
small non-ionic solutes32-36. The effect of the collagen
fibril network in the cartilage matrix on diffusion proc.
esses is less clear. It appears from experiments on
connective-tissue models and intact cartilage that a colla-
gen network could retard the diffusion of solutes to some
extent3’34. In contrast, the great importance of the mineral
content of growth-plate cartilage in affecting diffusion
processes seems incontrovertible.
The over-all relationship between the observed
changes of the diffusion coefficients secondary to
mineralization within the hypertrophic zone and the phys-
iological function of the chondrocytes is less well defined.
However, a number of characteristics of the hypertrophic
zone lead to several inferences. First, it has been well Cs.
tablished both morphologically and biochemically that
many chondrocytes of the zone of hypertrophic cells are
metabolically very active2’27. In addition, the point-
counting data have indicated that chondrocytes occupy
more than four times the relative volume in the hyper-
trophic zone than they do in hyaline cartilage. Thus, both
cellularity and metabolic activity reach high levels in the
zone of hypertrophic cells . One can infer that the require-

=== PAGE 9 ===
748 J. E. STAMBAUGH AND C. T. BRIGHTON
THE JOURNAL OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY
ments of nutrient and metabolic waste dispersal should matrix significantly hinders diffusion of nutrients to the
reach a high level in this zone as well. However, the carti- chondrocytes, it is significant that ash content (that is, the
lage matrix in the hypertrophic zone has the least ability to degree of calcification) was the physical parameter that
meet these needs by diffusion because the diffusion best correlated with all the diffusion coefficients.
coefficients in this zone are only about 50 per cent of the Although this high degree of correlation does not neces-
values found elsewhere in the growth plate. As a result of sarily prove a functional relationship between the two pa-
this inbalance between nutrient requirements and diffusive rameters, the findings strongly support the hypothesis that
capabilities, the hypertrophied chondrocytes are subjected calcification of cartilage matrix impedes diffusion in that
to a type of metabolic stagnation. The consequence of this tissue.
stagnation effect could be the death of the hypertrophic The ultimate result of this relationship between
cells at the bottom of the epiphyseal plate. Since the basic matrix calcification and diffusion could be the eventual
hypothesis being tested is that calcification of the cartilage death of the hypertrophic chondrocytes.
References
1. BOZLER, EMIL: Distribution of Nonelectrolytes in Muscle. Am. J. Physiol. , 200: 651-655, 1961.
2. BRIGHTON, C. T.; SUGI0KA, YOICHI; and HUNT, R. M.: Cytoplasmic Structures of Epiphyseal Plate Chondrocytes. Quantitative Evaluation
Using Electron Micrographs of Rat Costochondral Junctions with Special Reference to the Fate of Hypertrophic Cells. S. Bone and Joint Surg.,
55-A: 771-784, June 1973.
3. BROWN, WYN, and CHITUMBO, KALUBA: Solute Diffusion in Hydrated Polymer Networks, Part 1. Cellulose Gels. J. Chem. Soc. Faraday
Trans., 71: 1-11, 1975.
4. BROWN, WYN, and CHITUMBO, KALUBA: Solute Diffusion in Hydrated Polymer Networks. Part 2. Polyacrylamide, Hydroxyethylcellulose and
Cellulose Gels. J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans., 71: 12-21, 1975.
5. CAMPO, R. D.: Soluble and Resistant Proteoglycans in Epiphyseal Plate Cartilage. Calcif. Tissue Res. , 14: 105-119, 1974.
6. CIPERA, J. D.; MIGIC0v5KY, B. B.; and BLANGER, L. F.: Composition of Epiphyseal Cartilage. I. Changes in Hexosamine and Acetone Ex-
tractable Contents of Epiphyseal Cartilage of Rachitic Chicks Following Administration of Vitamin D3. Canadian J. Biochem. and Physiol. , 38:
807-811, 1960.
7. Cox, R.: Personal communication.
8. CRANK, J.: The Mathematics of Diffusion. London, Oxford University Press, 1956.
9. EISENSTEIN, REUBEN; SORGENTE, NIN0; and KUETTNER, K. E: Organization of Extracellular Matrix in Epiphyseal Growth Plate. Am. J.
Pathol., 65: 515-534, 1971.
10. GATT, R., and BERMAN, E. R.: A Rapid Procedure for the Estimation ofAmino Sugars on a Micro Scale. Analyt. Biochem., 15: 167-171, 1966.
I I . GIESE, A. C.: Cell Physiology. Ed. 3. Philadelphia, W. B. Saunders, 1968.
12. GODMAN, G. C., and PORTER, K. R.: Chondrogenesis Studied with the Electron Microscope. J. Biophys. and Biochem. Cytol., 8: 719-760,
1960.
13. GREER, R. B.; JANICKE, G. H.; and MANKIN, H. J.: Protein-Polysaccharide Synthesis at Three Levels of the Normal Growth Plate. Calcif.
Tissue Res., 2: 157-164. 1968.
14. GREER, R. B.; SKINNER, STEVE; ZARINS, ANTRA; and MANKIN, H. J.: Distribution of Acidic Glycosaminoglycans in Rabbit Growth Plate
Cartilage. Calcif. Tissue Res. , 9: 194-199, 1972.
15. HAM, A. W.: Some Histophysiological Problems Peculiar to Calcified Tissues. J. Bone and Joint Surg. , 34-A: 701-728, July 1952.
16. HAM, A. W.: Histology. Ed. 7. Philadelphia, J. B. Lippincott, 1974.
17. HERRING, 0. M.: The Chemical Structure of Tendon, Cartilage, Dentin and Bone Matrix. Clin. Orthop., 60: 261-299, 1968.
18. HOLTROP, M. E.: The Origin of Bone Cells in Endochondral Ossification. In Calcified Tissues, pp. 32-36. Edited by H. Fleisch, H. J. J.
Blackwood, and M. Owen. Berlin, Springer, 1966.
19. HOOFF, A. V. D.: Polysaccharide Histochemistry of Enchondral Ossification. Acta Anat., 57: 16-28, 1964.
20. HOWELL, D. S .: Histologic Observations and Biochemical Composition of Rachitic Cartilage with Special Reference to Mucopolysaccharides,
Arthrit. and Rheumat. , 8: 337-354, 1965.
21 . IRvING, J. T., and WUTHIER, R. E.: Histochemistry and Biochemistry of Calcification with Special Reference to the Role of Lipids. Clin.
Orthop. , 56: 237-260, 1968.
22. KEMBER, N. F.: Cell Division in Endochondral Ossification. A Study of Cell Proliferation in Rat Bones by the Method of Tritiated Thymidine
Autoradiography. J. Bone and Joint Surg. , 42.B: 824-839, Nov. 1960.
23. KEMBER, N. F.: Cell Population Kinetics of Bone Growth: The First Ten Years of Autoradiographic Studies with Tritiated Thymidine. Clin.
Orthop., 76: 213-230, 1971.
24. KIVIRIKKO, K. I.; LAITINEN, 0551; and PROCKOP, D. J.: Modifications of a Specific Assay for Hydroxyproline in Urine. Analyt. Biochem., 19
249-255, 1967.
25. KLEINZELLER, A., and KNOTKOV,, A.: Evaluation of the Extracellular Space of Tissue Slices from Steady-State Kinetics. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, 126: 604-605, 1966.
26. KRANE, S. M.; PARSONS, VICTOR; and KUNIN, A. S.: Studies of the Metabolism of Epiphyseal Cartilage, pp. 43-47. In Cartilage Degradation
and Repair, edited by C. A. L. Bassett. Washington, D.C. , National Research Council, National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of
Engineering, 1967.
27. KUHLMAN, R. E.: A Microchemical Study of the Developing Epiphyseal Plate. J. Bone and Joint Surg. , 42-A: 457-466, April 1960.
28. KUNIN, A. S ., and KRANE, S .M.: The Effect of Dietary Phosphorus on the Intermediary Metabolism of Epiphyseal Cartilage from Rachitic Rats.
Biochim. Biophys. Acts, 107: 203-214, 1965.
29. KUNIN, A. S., and KRANE, S. M.: Utilization of Citrate by Epiphyseal Cartilage of Rachitic and Normal Rats. Biochim. Biophys. Acts, 111:
32-39, 1965.
30. LARSSON, S.-E.; RAY, R. D.; and KUETTNER, K. E.: Microchemical Studies on Acid Glycosaminoglycansof the Epiphyseal Zones During
Endochondral Calcification. Calcif. Tissue Res., 13: 271-285, 1973.
31. LINDENBAUM, ARTHUR, and KUETTNER, K. E.: Mucopolysaccharides and Mucoproteins ofCalfScapula. Calif. Tissue Res., 1: 153-165, 1967.
32. MAROUDAS, ALICE: Physicochemical Properties of Cartilage in the Light of Ion Exchange Theory. Biophys. J. , 8: 575-595, 1968.
33. MAROUDAS, A.: Distribution and Diffusion of Solutes in Articular Cartilage. Biophys. J., 10: 365-379, 1970.
34. MAROUDAS, ALICE, and BULLOUGH, PETER: Permeability of Articular Cartilage. Nature, 219: 1260-1261, 1968.
35. PAGE, ERNEST: Cat Heart Muscle in Vitro. III. The Extracellular Space. J. Gen. Physiol. , 46: 201-213, 1962.
36. PRESTON , B . N ., and SNOWDEN , J . MCK .: Model Connective Tissue Systems: The Effect of Proteoglycans on the Diffusional Behavior of Small
Non-Electrolytes and Microions. Biopolymers, II: 1627-1643, 1972.
37. RANG, M. C.: The Growth Plate and Its Disorders. Baltimore, Williams and Wilkins, 1969.
38. ROBINSON, R. A., and CAMERON, D. A.: The Organic Matrix of Bone and Epiphyseal Cartilage. Clin. Orthop. , 9: 16-29, 1957.
39. ROSENBERG, L. E.; DOWNING, S. J.; and SEGAL, STANTON: Extracellular Space Estimation in Rat Kidney Slices Using C’4 Saccharides and
Phlorizin. Am. J. Physiol. , 202: 800-804, 1962.
40. SCOTT, B. L., and PEASE, D. C.: Electron Microscopy of the Epiphyseal Apparatus. Anat. Rec., 126: 465-493, 1956.

=== PAGE 10 ===
DIFFUSION IN THE VARIOUS ZONES OF THE GROWTH PLATE 749
VOL. 62-A, NO. 5. JULY 1980
41. SIMMONS, D. J., and KUNIN, A. S.: Developmentand Healing ofRickets in Rats. II. Studies with Tritiated Proline. Clin. Orthop.. 68: 26 1-272,
1970.
42. SIMoN. D. R.; BERMAN, IRWIN; and HOWELL, D. S.: Relationship of Extracellular Matrix Vesicles to Calcification in Normal and Healing
Rachitic Epiphyseal Cartilage. Anat. Rec., 176: 167-180, 1973.
43. STAMBAUGH, J. E.: The Diffusion Coefficients of 3H-Inulin and ‘4C-Sucrose in the Different Zones of the Epiphyseal Plate. Ph.D. Thesis,
University of Pennsylvania. 1976.
44. VITTUR, F.; PUGLIARELLO, M. C.; and DE BERNARD, B.: Chemical Modifications ofCartilage Matrix During Endochondral Calcification. Ex-
perientia, 27: 126-127, 1971.
45. WEIBEL, E. R.: Principles and Methods for the Morphometric Study of the Lung and Other Organs. Lab. Invest., 12: 131-155, 1963.
46. WUTHIER, R. E.: Lipids of Mineralizing Epiphyseal Tissues in the Bovine Fetus. J. Lipid Res. , 9: 68-78, 1968.
47. WUTHIER, R. E.: Zonal Analysis of Phospholipids in the Epiphyseal Cartilage and Bone of Normal and Rachitic Chickens and Pigs. Calcif.
Tissue Res., 8: 36-53, 1971.
Copynght 1980 by The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery. Incorporated
A Study of Lower-Limb Mechanics during Stair-Climbing
BY T. P. ANDRIACCHI, PH.D.t, G. B. J. ANDERSSON, M.D.t, R. W. FERMIER, B.S.t, D. STERN, D.P.M.t,
AND J. 0. GALANTE, M.D.t, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS
From the Department of Orthopedic Surgery. Rush-Presbyterian-St. Lukes Medical Center, Chicago
*
ABSTRACT: The motions, forces, and moments at
the major joints of the lower limbs of ten men ascend-
ing and descending stairs were analyzed using an
optoelectronic system, a force-plate, and electromy-
ography. The mean values for the maximum sagittal-
plane motions of the hip, knee, and ankle were 42, 88,
and 27 degrees, respectively. The mean maximum
net flexion-extension moments were: at the hip, 123.9
newton-meters going up and 112.5 newton-meters
going down stairs; at the knee, 57. 1 newton-meters
going up and 146.6 newton-meters going down stairs;
and at the ankle, 137.2 newton-meters going up and
107.5 newton-meters going down stairs. When going
Up and down stairs large moments are present about
weight-bearing joints, but descending movements
produce the largest moments. The magnitudes of these
moments are considerably higher than those produced
during level walking.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The findings in this study
indicate that the forces generated and the functional
requirements during stair-climbing should be consid-
ered when establishing design criteria for prosthetic
devices for weight-bearing joints and when advising
patients about their activities.
Going up and down stairs is a common activity of
daily living. From a mechanical viewpoint, it is quite dif-
ferent from level walking. The differences are reflected by
changes in the ranges of motion of the different joints dur-
ing gait, and changes in the phasic muscle activities and in
the maximum joint forces and moments. An understanding
of the mechanics of stair-climbing is an important step
S This research was supported in part by National Institutes of
Health National Research Service Award AM 05020-01 , Public Health
Service Grant AM 20702-01 AFY, the Dr. Scholl Foundation, and the
Arthritis Foundation.
1 Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke’s Medical Center, 1753 West Con-
gress Parkway. Chicago. Illinois 60612.
toward greater knowledge of the function of the lower ex-
tremities and the pathogenesis of lower-extremity disor-
ders. This information is also needed to improve patient
management and to develop criteria for the design of safe
joint replacements for the lower extremity.
Kinematic studies have shown that a larger range of
knee motion is required during stair-climbing than during
level walking’7’1’ . Using electrogoniometers, Laubenthal
et al. observed that about 83 degrees of knee flexion is re-
quired to go up and down stairs . Hoffman et al . reported a
similar range of sagittal knee motion during stair-climbing
in a group of fifty subjects and found that approximately
12 degrees’ more knee flexion is required during stair-
climbing than during level walking.
Observations of phasic muscle activity1’-12-14 have
indicated that there are major differences in the activities
of the muscles during stair-climbing as opposed to level
walking. These differences in activity are mainly in the
muscles responsible for vertical movement of the body.
Climbing up stairs, the differences are reflected by
changes in the contractions of the soleus, quadriceps
femoris, hamstrings, and gluteus maximus during the sup-
port phase; going down stairs, the differences are reflected
by changes in the contractions of the soleus and quadriceps
femoris muscles6-14. The duration of the activity of the
flexor muscles of the knee has been observed to be small
compared with the activity of the extensor muscles of the
knee, both ascending and descending  . Further-
more, the knee extensor muscles are required to generate
larger forces during stair-climbing than during level walk-
ing. Morrison and Paul confirmed this observation using
data derived by means of electromyography, a force-plate,
and high-speed moving pictures of three subjects ascend-
ing and descending stairs. The information obtained was
used to calculate maximum joint forces at the knee, which
were found to be 12 to 25 per cent higher than those during
level walking. Using an analytical model, Townsend and
