=== PAGE 1 ===
Solute Transport in Growth Plate Cartilage: In Vitro and In Vivo
Rebecca M. Williams,* Warren R. Zipfel, y Michelle L. Tinsley, z and Cornelia E. Farnum z
*Applied and Engineering Physics, yBiomedical Engineering, and zBiomedical Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York
ABSTRACT Bone elongation originates from cartilaginous discs (growth plates) at both ends of a growing bone. Here chon-
drocytes proliferate and subsequently enlarge (hypertrophy), laying down a matrix that serves as the scaffolding for subsequent
bone matrix deposition. Because cartilage is generally avascular, all nutrients, oxygen, signaling molecules, and waste must be
transported relatively long distances through the tissue for it to survive and function. Here we examine the transport properties
of growth plate cartilage. Ex vivo, ﬂuorescence photobleaching recovery methods are used in tissue explants. In vivo, multi-
photon microscopy is used to image through an intact perichondrium and into the cartilage of anesthetized mice. Systemically
introduced ﬂuorescent tracers are monitored directly as they move from the vasculature into the cartilage. We demonstrate the
existence of a relatively permissive region at the midplane of the growth plate, where chondrocytes transition from late prolif-
erative to early hypertrophic stages and where paracrine communication is known to occur between chondrocytes and cells in
the surrounding perichondrium. Transport in the living mouse is also signiﬁcantly affected by ﬂuid ﬂow from the two chondro-
osseus junctions, presumably resulting from a pressure difference between the bone vasculature and the cartilage.
INTRODUCTION
Bone elongation occurs by endochondral ossiﬁcation, which
is controlled at the cellular level by chondrocytes within the
growth plate (Fig. 1). These cells undergo a differentiation
cascade in which stem cells (resting cells) at the epiphyseal
(E) side ﬁrst undergo a proliferation phase, followed by a
hypertrophy phase in which they stop dividing, enlarge and
lay down an extracellular scaffolding for new bone forma-
tion at the metaphyseal ( M) side (toward the diaphysis). The
extent of chondrocytic enlargement can be directly corre-
lated to the extent of bone elongation (1–3). After death of
the terminal chondrocyte, the replacement of cartilage by
bone occurs via a synchronized interaction among endothe-
lial cells, chondroclasts, and bone precursor cells. Chondro-
cytic activity in the growth plate is regulated by a wide array
of autocrine and paracrine regulators (for reviews, see 4–9),
many of which are produced at sites distant from their sites
of action. A clearly demonstrated example is the PTHrP/Ihh
signaling loop in which parathyroid-related protein (PTHrP)
produced within the periarticular chondrocytes and peri-
chondrium is known to limit the number of chondrocytes that
express Indian Hedgehog (Ihh). In addition to inducing chon-
drocytes to begin differentiation, Ihh also acts to upregulate
PTHrP expression, completing a negative feedback loop that
delays the rate of overall chondrocyte differentiation (10,11).
The mechanism by which remotely produced signals main-
tain such a tight regulation remains unclear, especially in the
postnatal animal. Other examples of remotely produced dif-
fusible effector molecules with action on the chondrogenic
differentiation cascade within the growth plate include ﬁbro-
blast growth factor 18, various isoforms of bone morphogenic
protein (BMPs), and transforming growth factor-beta, which
all are produced in the cambrial layer of the perichondrium
surrounding the growth plate (4,6,9,12). Analogously, ma-
trix metalloproteases (MMPs MMP-9 and MT-MMP) pro-
duced by chondroclasts at the metaphyseal chondro-osseus
junction (COJ) are essential for apoptosis of terminal hyper-
trophic chondrocytes and subsequent vessel invasion and bone
formation (13–16). The spatial location of the signals pro-
duced and the transport properties of the cartilage are critical
to the communication between cells and the maintenance of
growth plate organization. A particularly elegant demonstra-
tion comes from a comprehensive examination of the sig-
naling defects in the skeletal disorder Exostosin1 (EXT1)
mutation. EXT1 mutations result in a loss of heparin sulfate
chains on extracellular matrix (ECM) proteoglycans, which
dramatically decreases the interaction of Ihh with the ECM,
increasing the range of Ihh signaling within the growth plate
and causing an extended proliferative zone due to excessive
activation of PTHrP (17–19). Note that the phenotype origi-
nates from a defect to the transport properties of the signaling
molecule, rather than to the molecule itself. In humans, these
mutations result in a variety of skeletal abnormalities such as
bone deformities, joint fusions, and short stature. The diffus-
ible range of a particular effector molecule or morphogen is a
concept that is generally ubiquitous to the literature of devel-
opment and developmental processes (for example, see (20)).
The transport properties of growth plate cartilage are
crucial not only to understanding molecular signaling, but to
understanding chondrocytic viability generally. Several de-
cades ago, it was shown that growth plate chondrocytes at all
stages of differentiation die after compromising the epiph-
yseal vasculature (21). The paradigm that chondrocyte viability
is dependent upon a viable epiphyseal vasculature remains
true today (for example, see (22)). By contrast, a compromise
to the metaphyseal vasculature does not result in chondrocytic
Submitted September 18, 2006, and accepted for publication March 30, 2007.
Address reprint requests to R. M. Williams, Tel.: 607-255-8034; E-mail:
rw36@cornell.edu.
Editor: Elliot L. Elson.
/C2112007 by the Biophysical Society
0006-3495/07/08/1039/12 $2.00 doi: 10.1529/biophysj.106.097675
Biophysical Journal Volume 93 August 2007 1039–1050 1039
=== PAGE 2 ===
death within the growth plate (21), only a failure of chon-
drocytic apoptosis and bone formation on the metaphyseal
side. Taken together, these ﬁndings have led to a hypoth-
esized unidirectional entrance of nutrients, sourced by the
epiphyseal vasculature. In addition, a somewhat controver-
sial hypothesis (23) states that hypertrophic chondrocytes are
hypoxic, driven by the fact that angiogenesis in the hyper-
trophic zone (and chondrocytic differentiation generally) is
regulated by hypoxia inducible transcription factor 1 a (HIF-
1a (24)). These ideas suggest that chondrocytic access to
oxygen and nutrients from the metaphyseal vasculature is
somewhat limited, even though the vessels at this location
are known to be leaky (25), as is characteristic of actively
growing and remodeling vasculature.
The goal of this investigation was to understand the bio-
physical properties of molecular transport in and around the
growth plate using several strategies. Firstly, ex vivo anal-
yses were carried out in coarse-cut growth plate sections
using a three-dimensionally resolved form of ﬂuorescence
photobleaching recovery (26,27). Secondly, ﬂuorescent tracers
were introduced into the systematic vasculature of anesthe-
tized animals and their arrival into the growth plate, imaged
directly using multiphoton microscopy (28). This technique
allowed us to image through the intact perichondrium, which
is highly vascularized and critical to growth plate function.
Tracers entered into the growth plate from three sources:
bone vasculature on the epiphyseal side, bone vasculature on
the metaphyseal side, and a vascular plexus surrounding the
growth plate just deep to the perichondrium (Fig. 1). Pre-
viously we have shown that equilibration into the growth
plate took several minutes (29). In the present study, ﬂuo-
rescence entry curves were ﬁt to determine ﬂow rates and dif-
fusion coefﬁcients within the cartilage. Both ex vivo and in
vivo strategies revealed a permissive region at the midplane
of the growth plate, where chondrocytes make an abrupt tran-
sition from a proliferative ( P) to a hypertrophic ( H) pheno-
type. Regions adjacent to the two chondro-osseus junctions
were severalfold more hindered to diffusion. Flow from the
bone into the cartilage also enhanced equilibration of small
vascular solutes into the growth plate.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
We chose two methods for examining the transport properties of growth
plate cartilage. Both require multiphoton microscopy for sectioning rela-
tively deeply into tissue. In the ﬁrst ex vivo method, we measured the dif-
fusion coefﬁcient in isolated cartilage by focusing the beam to a micron-sized
spot in the extracellular matrix, photobleaching the ﬂuorescent tracers in that
spot and monitoring the recovery to determine the diffusion coefﬁcient. In
the second in vivo method, a surgical approach was made to the proximal
tibia in an anesthetized mouse. We imaged through the perichondrium and in
to the growth plate to determine how a bolus of tracer injected into the
bloodstream moves into the growth plate. The second method resulted in a
time series of images of tracer entering from the bloodstream and equili-
brating through the growth plate in a live animal. This method allowed us to
examine general theories such as the hypothesized epiphyseal sourcing of
small solutes to the growth plate. Under deﬁned conditions, image analysis
methods could be used to determine transport coefﬁcients in the living animal.
Multiphoton microscopy
We used a multiphoton microscope consisting of a Ti:Sapphire laser
(Millennia Xs/Tsunami combination, Spectra Physics, Mountain View, CA)
directed into a modiﬁed BioRad model No. MRC 600 laser scanner
interfaced with a modiﬁed (ﬁxed-stage) model No. AX-70 upright micro-
scope (Olympus, Center Valley, PA). A model No. 350-80 BKLA Pockel’s
Cell (Conoptics, Danbury, CT) with custom-made electronics provided beam
intensity modulation and blanking during scanner ﬂyback. The excitation
light was focused into the growth plate region with a large-barrel Olympus
203/0.95 NA water objective, which provides a large ﬁeld-of-view, a rela-
tively high NA, good IR transmission, and the few mm of working distance
essential for maneuvering in live animals.
As described previously (29), we oriented to the growth plate using collagen
second-harmonic generation imaging of the perichondrial anatomy in addition
to oxytetracycline (OTC) ﬂuorescent labeling of the rapidly growing regions of
bone directly adjacent to the growth plate. The multiphoton excitation wave-
length peak ( lex) was tuned to 900 nm because FITC absorbs well at this
wavelength (30), whereas water and intrinsic cellular absorbers do not (31).
Nonlinear emissions were collected in epi mode and separated from the ex-
citation beam directly after the objective with a model No. 670DCXXRU long-
pass dichroic (Chroma Technology, Rockingham). Emission ﬁlters were chosen
for a blue (400–490 nm for collagen second-harmonic generation) and visible
(510–650 nm for ﬂuorescein and OTC emission) separation (model Nos.
BGG22 and 580/150 ﬁlters with a separating model No. 500DCXR dichroic,
Chroma Technology) and a 10 7 rejection ratio of the exciting to emitting
wavelengths. The resulting two emissions were collected by model No. HC125-
02 bialkali photomultiplier tube assemblies (Hamamatsu, Hamamatsu City,
Japan) directed into the external ports of the BioRad acquisition electronics.
FIGURE 1 Diagram of a juvenile bone, showing the
three major vascular sources to the avascular growth plate.
Chondrocytes align in axial rows and proliferate exten-
sively. Differentiation and hypertrophy of these cells is
thought to be involved in the pushing of the epiphysis away
from the elongating metaphysis. Secreted matrix acts as the
scaffolding for bone formation at the metaphyseal end.
Spatially varying transport coefﬁcients are described in
terms of the normalized axial position from 0.0 at the
epiphyseal COJ to 1.0 at the metaphyseal COJ. Note that the
proliferative-to-hypertrophic transition occurs roughly at
the axial center of the growth plate.
1040 Williams et al.
Biophysical Journal 93(3) 1039–1050
=== PAGE 3 ===
Fluorescent tracers
We used the ﬂuorescent tracers ﬂuorescein (FL, MW 332, AK-FLUOR,
Akorn, Buffalo Grove, IL), 10 kDa ﬂuorescein-labeled dextran (10k-FL,
D1821, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), 40 kDa ﬂuorescein-labeled dextran (40k-
FL, D-1844, Invitrogen), and a 45 kDa ﬂuorescein-labeled ovalbumin (Ova-
FL, O23020, Invitrogen) to mimic molecules across a range of molecular
weights. Fluorescein was diluted 10-fold from 10% ophthalmologic stock
solutions (300 mM) and a 50ml intracardiac (IC) injection administered to yield
an approximate vascular concentration of;2m M( f o rat y p i c a l1 1gm o u s e ) .
Solutions of ﬂuorescein-labeled dextrans were prepared at 100 mg/ml in
phosphate-buffered saline solution. Depending on the labeling concentra-
tion, varying amounts were injected IC to yield a vascular ﬂuorescence
concentration similar to that for FL. For photobleaching analyses, coarsely-
cut tibial sections were incubated in 100 mM equivalent dye.
Our goal was to use variously-sized neutral dextrans to mimic how variously-
sized signaling molecules would be transported within the growth plate. How-
ever, we found that only the highly-anionic dextrans could be solubilized to
the extent necessary for visualization in vivo. Thus, we could not separate
charge-effects from size-effects for the larger tracers in the live animals.
Ex vivo diffusion coefﬁcient measurement via
photobleaching of isolated tissue
Specimens were prepared for ex vivo photobleaching analyses by halving
isolated tibias from 4-to-5-week-old mice using a single cut with a razor
head. These sections were immersed in lactated Ringer’s solution with 5%
fetal bovine serum and kept on ice for no more than 2 h. In isolated tissue
slabs, we assume no ﬂow, so that diffusion coefﬁcients can be measured by
a standard ﬂuorescence photobleaching recovery (FPR) assay, in which a
tightly focused beam is held stationary at the region of interest. A high-
intensity laser pulse is used to bleach ﬂuorophores within the focal volume.
Subsequently at a lower monitoring intensity, the ﬂuorescence increases due
to fresh (unbleached) ﬂuorophores back into the focal volume. This recovery
is ﬁt to determine a diffusion coefﬁcient for this ﬂuorescent species. (The
technique is also known as ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching or
FRAP.) Multiphoton (MP) excitation is generally restricted to the focal volume,
so that MP-FPR can be carried out in three dimensions rather than being limited
to two dimensions as with standard (single photon) excitation (26,27).
For MP-FPR, we used the same scanning and detection instrumentation
as described for multiphoton microscopy. We focused ;50 mm into the
cartilage so as to measure far from the cut surface. The beam was then
‘‘parked’’ at a stationary location in the specimen and the Pockel’s Cell was
used to deliver repeated bleach pulses followed by monitoring periods with
;10-fold lower laser intensities. Fluorescence curves were acquired using a
model No. SR430 multichannel scaler (Stanford Research Systems, Sunnyvale,
CA) and the electronics were synchronized for repeated bleaching patterns
using a model No. DG535 digital delay/pulse generator (Stanford Research
Systems). The recovery curve (the postbleach ﬂuorescence trace normalized
to the initial ﬂuorescence) was ﬁt to the following numerical series for iden-
tifying two diffusion coefﬁcients (26,27),
FðtÞ
F0
¼ A1 +
n max
n¼0
ð/C0 bÞ
n
n!
1
1 1 n 1 4nD1t=w
2
r
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
1 1 n 1 4nD1t=w
2
z
q
2
64
3
75
1 A2 +
n max
n¼0
ð/C0 bÞ
n
n!
1
1 1 n 1 4nD2t=w
2
r
1ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
1 1 n 1 4nD2t=w
2
z
q
2
64
3
75;
(1)
where wr and wz are the 1/ e2 lateral and axial radii of the two photon spot
sizes (28) and b is the bleach depth. A1 and A2, the relative amplitudes of
species diffusing with D1 and D2 diffusion coefﬁcients, respectively, are
determined using a three-parameter Marquardt-Levenberg algorithm ( A1 1
A2 ¼ 1). Summation to n ¼ 10 was usually sufﬁcient for convergence.
Critical to determining diffusive behavior accurately with this formulation
are the assumptions that the bleach time is small compared to the recovery
time and that the bleach depth is small compared to the total ﬂuorescence
(27). In an optical setup where the objective back aperture is overﬁlled by the
laser beam (more precisely the 1/ e width of the beam greater than the
objective back aperture), the spot size is determined by the objective NA and
exciting wavelength. We used excitation at 780 nm with an Olympus 20 3/
0.95NA water immersion objective, giving a wr and wz of 270 and 1040 nm,
respectively (28). FPR measurements were carried out using a 50 ms bleach
pulse with an intensity resulting in a bleach depth of ,20%. The monitoring
intensity was adjusted so as to not saturate the photon counter ( ,1 MHz
count rates for the ;40 ns pulses emanating from the speciﬁed PMT mod-
ule). Bleach and monitor powers at the specimen were measured to be 50–
200 mW and 3–8 mW, respectively. Note that these powers were measured
at the surface of the specimen and expected to be signiﬁcantly lower at the
imaging plane. Each measurement represents 5- ms binned data from ;100
repetitions at 10 Hz. Because recovery times are in the millisecond range,
this frequency was low enough to ensure a complete recovery in the ﬂuo-
rescence curve before another bleach could occur.
Preparation of mice for in vivo imaging
Four-to-ﬁve-week-old C57BL/6 or DBA/2J mice were prepared for in vivo
multiphoton imaging (29). The mouse to be imaged was injected 30 min
before the imaging session with OTC (10 mg/kg intraperitoneal), which
labels the chondro-osseous junctions with yellow-emitting ﬂuorescence to
aid in orientation for viewing. For surgery and imaging, the mouse was laid
in dorsal recumbency on a temperature-regulated heating pad with its nose in
an isoﬂurane gas anesthesia delivery tube. An incision was made on the
posteriomedial aspect of the limb and overlying muscles were removed just
caudal to the medial collateral ligament superﬁcial to the proximal tibial
growth plate. The limb was immobilized and immersed in Ringer’s solution
for imaging and the temperature of the bath maintained at 35 /C176C with an
inline solution heater (model No. TC344, Warner Instruments, Hamden, CT)
and perfusion pumps (pump controller model No. T553-60, Masterﬂex,
Gelsenkirchen, Germany). All procedures were approved by Cornell Uni-
versity’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
In vivo diffusion coefﬁcient measurement via
elemental image analysis of tracer entry
The rate of exchange from the vasculature is dependent upon the pressure
differential between the vasculature and the interstitial tissue. Within a living
organism, transport properties are not necessarily diffusion-dominated. We
observe tracer entering the growth plate from the vasculature and interpret
the resulting images assuming that the tracer exhibits both diffusive and ﬂow
transport properties. The time rate of change of tracer concentration ( C) un-
dergoing Fickian (normal) diffusion with a spatially varying diffusion coef-
ﬁcient ( D) and under a force-differential-causing ﬂow is given by (32)
@C
@t ¼ = /C1ð D=CÞ/C0 v /C1 =C; (2)
where D is the diffusion coefﬁcient and v is the velocity of ﬂow.
When focused deeply enough ( .50 mm deep to the deep edge of the
perichondrium), the subperichondrial ring vessel and plexus are negligible
sources of tracer arrival to the growth plate (29). Under these conditions, the
images appear to be symmetric along the long axis of the bone. Images are
rotated so that this axis is parallel to the x axis. By assuming cylindrical
symmetry, we reduce diffusion calculations to a one-dimensional problem
given by
Transport in Growth Plate Cartilage 1041
Biophysical Journal 93(3) 1039–1050
=== PAGE 4 ===
@C
@t ¼ D @
2
C
@x
2 1 @D
@x
@C
@x /C0 v @C
@x : (3)
Time series of tracer entry into the cartilage consisting of 100 images at 5.8 s
intervals are collected directly after IC injection. These images are simpliﬁed
to 100 curves by averaging image data laterally across the growth plate. As
evident from Fig. 4 d, the raw data contains ‘‘sharp’’ features, high
frequency pixel-to-pixel variations, due either to photon shot noise or
cellularly resolved structures within the growth plate. Such features cause
selection of artifactual D and v values. Fifth-order polynomial ﬁts to these
curves provided smoothed ﬁts to the curves, while allowing fast calculations
of ﬁrst and second (spatial) derivatives. All image analysis was accom-
plished using algorithms written within the IDL scripting language
(Research Systems, Boulder, CO). To limit the analysis to signiﬁcant
changes in tracer signal, only curves from 30 to 180 s after IC injection are
analyzed. At each point in each curve in this dataset, the time rate of change
of the ﬂuorescence as well as its ﬁrst and second derivatives with respect to
the long axis are calculated. D and v values are chosen via minimization of
the x-square value (33) at each axial position,
x
2
¼ +
@C
@t /C0 D@
2
C
@x
2 1 @D
@x
@C
@x /C0 v@C
@x
/C18/C19/C20/C21 2
s
2
=n ; (4)
where the sum is over data from different time points, s2 is the variance of
measured @C=@t values calculated laterally along the growth plate, and n is
the number of lines averaged. For all data analyzed, x2 values averaged to
2.1. For each series analyzed, we chose three points along the growth plate
and plotted the x2 surface. The x2 minimization displayed as a trough
with an average width of DD ¼ 11 mm2/s and Dv ¼ 0.48 mm/s, so that the
error due to the x2 convergence was signiﬁcantly smaller than that due to
experimental variation (see Results). This image analysis method for
determining D and v transport coefﬁcients was tested and veriﬁed using both
simulated images of molecular diffusion and image data from 1-mm-wide
channels with FL and 40k-FL (Fig. 2). The calculated D and v curves
from individual growth plates were compared and averaged by normalizing
the x axis such that the epiphyseal COJ is 0.0 and the metaphyseal COJ
is 1.0.
RESULTS
Ex vivo matrix diffusion properties
To understand the transport properties of growth plate car-
tilage, we initially examined the diffusional properties of
isolated tibial sections using MP-FPR. Fluorescence photo-
bleaching traces were acquired several cell-layers-deep in
cartilage sections incubated with ﬂuorescently labeled probes
of three different molecular sizes. Measurements were taken
at ;20-mm intervals from the E to the M ends of the cartilage
(marked by squares in the representative ovalbumin-FL incu-
bated specimen in Fig. 3 a). Fig. 3 b shows two representative
photobleaching traces ( red and orange) in the proliferative
and hypertrophic zones of the growth plate, respectively. Rep-
resentative data along the growth plate is plotted in Fig. 3 c
as a function of the normalized growth plate distance dia-
gramed in Fig. 1. For this specimen, diffusion coefﬁcients
at the E and M COJs were 40% and 60% less than the peak
value at the axial center of the growth plate. This same trend
is consistent with general data from FL ( blue, n ¼ 7), 10k-FL
(green, an anionic dextran,n ¼ 6), and Ova-FL (yellow,an e u -
tral 45 kDa protein, n ¼ 6) plotted in Fig. 3 d. Using MP-FPR
in solution, diffusion coefﬁcients for FL, 10k-FL, and Ova-
FL were 265 6 30, 88 6 10, and 55 6 8 mm2/s, respectively.
These measurements generally conform to a Stokes-Einstein
hard sphere analysis, in which the viscous drag is determined
by the inverse radius of the molecule, and are consistent with
values in the literature (34). Measured D-values in cartilage
are also consistent with this model; for example, diffusion
coefﬁcients for the FL and the 10k-FL vary by roughly
threefold, the ratio one calculates for a (MW)/C0 1/3 dependence.
(The measured ratio is more precisely 2.5-fold, presumably
reﬂecting the fact that FL is a planar molecule.)
FIGURE 2 Veriﬁcation of our image-
based method for measuring diffu-
sion. Images of ( a) FL and ( b) 40k-FL
diffusing in a 1-mm-wide channel with
ﬂow. Images are acquired at 10-s in-
tervals but displayed at 200 and 100 s
intervals for FL and 40k-FL, respec-
tively. To avoid edge effects, only data
from the center of the channel were
used. Fluorescence data from the FL
and 40k-FL time series were averaged
laterally across the channel and dis-
played in curves that are color-coded to
indicate time ( c and d, respectively).
Note that at these temporal and spatial
scales, FL transport is dominated by dif-
fusion, which tends to equilibrate con-
centration gradients, but 40k-FL transport
is dominated by ﬂow, which causes a
translocation of concentration gradients.
Fits to the curves yielded average diffusion (ﬂow) values of 223 mm2/s (2.3 mm/s) and 56 mm2/s (4.2 mm/s) for FL and 40k-FL, respectively. Solution diffusion
coefﬁcients were within 30% of those measured using standard FPR measurements described subsequently and those reported in the literature (51).
Multiphoton images were acquired as described in Materials and Methods, except that a low magniﬁcation 43/0.28 NA Olympus macro objective was used for
obtaining the necessary large ﬁeld-of-view.
1042 Williams et al.
Biophysical Journal 93(3) 1039–1050
=== PAGE 5 ===
In vivo transport properties of small molecules
Because of its ability to penetrate relatively deeply into op-
tically scattering specimens, multiphoton microscopy offers
a unique opportunity to visualize the growth plate in vivo.
Direct imaging in the living animal allows us to account for
transport characteristics within the environment of an intact
growth plate, which experiences a wide spectrum of physi-
ologic pressures and potentially interstitial ﬂuid ﬂow due to
an intact circulatory system. We cannot measure diffusion
coefﬁcients using MP-FPR in an intact growth plate pri-
marily because we are unable to achieve the powers neces-
sary for photobleaching the dye after penetrating through
the perichondrium. (Other problems with this method in vivo
include ﬂow and breathing artifacts.) Our approach in the
living animal has been to administer a bolus of ﬂuorescent
tracer to the circulatory system via an intracardiac injection
and directly observe ﬂuorescent tracer movement into the
growth plate region. We previously showed that ﬂuorescent
tracers of 10,000 MW and less saturate the full growth plate
region ( ;300 mm across) within 5 min (29).
Representative data of vascular ﬂuorescein extravasating
and moving into the ECM of a growth plate is shown in the
time series of images 18, 54, and 102 s after the IC injection
(Fig. 4, a–c). The ﬂuorescence intensity is averaged laterally
across the growth plate to generate the time series of ﬂuo-
rescence proﬁles in Fig. 4 d, color-coded to indicate time.
Initial ﬁts using diffusion as the only transport parameter
yielded abnormally high diffusion coefﬁcients and inconsis-
tent ﬁts. We found that ﬁtting the tracer equilibration data for
both diffusion and ﬂow (convection) transport processes was
essential for achieving consistent results. To ﬁt the data, the
laterally averaged ﬂuorescence (Fig. 4 d) between the two
COJs (demarcated by dotted lines ) was ﬁt to easily differ-
entiated functions ( ﬁfth-order polynomials , Fig. 4 e). The
rate of change of the data was then analyzed as a function of
its ﬁrst and second spatial derivatives for determining the
local transport coefﬁcients within the cartilage (Eq. 3). D and
v curves were selected by a x2-minimization routine at each
point along the growth plate (Eq. 4). To compare the trans-
port coefﬁcients of different growth plates, the axial position
from all growth plates is normalized to 0.0 at the E COJ and
1.0 at the M COJ. The approximate positions of the resting,
proliferative, and hypertrophic zones are diagramed for refer-
ence along this scale in Fig. 1. The blue and orange curves
plotted in Fig. 4 f show axially speciﬁc diffusion coefﬁcients
and ﬂow rates for the particular series shown in Fig. 4, a–c.
The error bars show the average mean 6 SE for n ¼ 7 such
series. Overall ﬂow is directed from the two vascularized
COJs into the cartilage. Diffusion coefﬁcients are found to be
ﬁvefold higher in the axial center of the cartilage than at the
two COJs. Note that at the metaphyseal COJ, a trough in the
ﬂuorescence intensity often appears over time (Fig. 4 d). This
is a consistent result, which we believe is real and may result
from lymphatic drainage within the region.
FIGURE 3 Multiphoton ﬂuorescence photobleaching recovery diffusion measurements. Proximal tibial sections are isolated, sectioned once midsagi tally,
and incubated in either FL, 10k-FL or Ova-FL. (a–c) Representative data from an Ova-FL incubated growth plate. Scale bar ¼ 25 mm. The laser is parked at the
locations indicated ( squares) and a 50- ms pulse bleaches out ;20% of the ﬂuorescence in the focal spot; the timescale of ﬂuorescence recovery is ﬁt to
determine diffusion coefﬁcients for the species in that location. Example FPR traces from the red and orange squares are shown in panel b with their respective
ﬁts. (c) Diffusion coefﬁcients for the locations indicated in panel a are plotted against the normalized axial position along the growth plate. The curve shows a
polynomial ﬁt to the data. ( d) Cumulative plot of data such as those in panel c from multiple experiments and multiple tracers. These data represent
measurements from n ¼ 7 (FL, blue), n ¼ 6 (10k-FL, green), and n ¼ 6 (Ova-FL, yellow) similar experiments.
Transport in Growth Plate Cartilage 1043
Biophysical Journal 93(3) 1039–1050
=== PAGE 6 ===
A caveat to this analysis is that differential partitioning
of the tracer can occur within the growth plate due to bind-
ing and endocytosis, resulting in tracer that cannot move.
The major problem seems to be ﬂuorescence that is actively
transported into the hypertrophic chondrocytes, resulting in a
stronger signal from the hypertrophic region of the growth
plate. This effect is especially visible after 5 min. We tried
several methods for alleviating these effects, both normal-
izing to an ‘‘equilibrated’’ tracer concentration and masking
out ﬂuorescence inside the cells using thresholding algorithms.
In both cases, extra complications were introduced to the anal-
ysis and the problems were not entirely alleviated. We de-
cided instead to use a relatively fast analysis window; only
data from 30 to 180 s after injection were analyzed. This time
window maximized the effect of the real concentration dif-
ferential due to the injection, while minimizing partitioning
effects. Note that the concentration maximum in the hyper-
trophic region (Fig. 4 d) moves in toward the axial center, an
indication that it represents a translocation of the injection
bolus as it ﬂows across the growth plate rather than an effect
due to differential partitioning.
Another caveat to this experiment is that although we
image deep enough into the growth plate that chondrocytic
columns are parallel and aligned perpendicular to the two
COJs, we are still toward the edge of the bone. For instance,
Fig. 4, a–c, shows images that are 165- mm deep (through
90 mm of perichondrium and 75 mm of growth plate). How-
ever, tibias in mice this age average 1.2 mm in width, so we
are still only imaging within the outer quarter of the growth
plate; results must be interpreted accordingly.
In vivo transport properties of larger molecules
We previously showed that FL as well as the larger ﬂuo-
resceinated dextrans enter the growth plate from three primary
vascular sources, the epiphyseal and metaphyseal vasculature
as well as the circumferential plexus surrounding the growth
plate. Compared quantitatively to the amount of FL entering
the region, 3 kDa and 10 kDa dextrans only enter the growth
plate at 62 and 15%, respectively (29). Though all tracers can
arrive from all three vascular sources, repeated imaging ob-
servations with different size indicators at the same region
FIGURE 4 Multiphoton images of the proximal tibial growth plate 165- mm deep from the superﬁcial surface of the perichondrium in a 32-day-old mouse
(a) 18, (b) 54, and (c) 102 s after an IC injection of FL. The tracer is distributed to the epiphyseal and metaphyseal vasculature ( EV and MV) within seconds and
reaches the axial center of the growth plate within minutes (scale bar ¼ 50 mm). Such images are recorded every 5.8 s and the intensity values are averaged
laterally and displayed color-coded for time in panel d. Polynomial ﬁts to these curves ( e) provide functions that are smoothed and easily differentiable. Local
ﬂow rates and diffusion coefﬁcients are calculated by analyzing the rate-of-change of the ﬂuorescence and comparing it to the ﬁrst and second spatial
derivatives at every point. For comparison among growth plates, the axial position along the growth plate is normalized such that the E and M COJs are at 0.0
and 1.0, respectively; positions are demarcated by vertical dotted lines throughout the ﬁgure. ( f) The blue and orange curves represent the local D and v values
for the image series in panels a–c. The error bars show average mean 6 SE for n ¼ 7 similar experiments.
1044 Williams et al.
Biophysical Journal 93(3) 1039–1050
=== PAGE 7 ===
in the same growth plate suggest a subtle difference in the
arrival pattern; the larger and more anionic dextrans tend to
arrive more from the subperichondrial plexus than does FL.
For example, Fig. 5 a shows the edge of the growth plate, or
the ‘‘groove of Ranvier’’, 63, 168, and 290 s after an IC in-
jection of 10k-FL. Note that the larger tracer seems to arrive
from the edge ( arrow), presumably from the subperichon-
drial plexus encircling the cartilage disk. Note also that the
10k-FL never entirely equilibrates within this measurement
window. Fig. 5 b shows the same region 12, 46, and 93 s
after a second IC injection, this time with FL. In this series,
the tracer arrived to the growth plate faster and clearly from
the E and M vasculatures. We see this same trend toward a
more circumferential entrance for the larger dextrans in ﬁve
out of eight similar experiments. (The other three experi-
ments were inconclusive due to a lack of signal in the growth
plate.) Because of a combination of low signal and lack of
axial symmetry in the entrance time series, the elemental
image analysis protocol could not be used for determining
transport coefﬁcients for these larger tracers.
The more circumferential entrance of the larger dextrans
occurs at least in part because of a severe transport block into
the growth plate at the metaphyseal COJ. Fig. 6 a shows an
image series at 90-s intervals after an IC injection of 10k-FL.
Note that the tracer leaks out of the metaphyseal vasculature
and labels the matrix of the primary spongiosa, but very little
of it moves across the metaphyseal COJ and into the car-
tilage. A similar series after an IC injection of FL (at 12-s in-
tervals, Fig. 6 b) shows the tracer quickly crossing the COJ
boundary upon extravasating from the metaphyseal vascu-
lature. In Fig. 6, c and d, ﬂuorescence values from the vas-
culature ( red), the bone matrix ( blue), and the growth plate
just adjacent to the COJ ( green) are plotted as a function of
time for the two series. Note that for 10k-FL (Fig. 6 c), ﬂuo-
rescence in the bone matrix peaks several minutes after that
from the vasculature, but signal in the cartilage does not ap-
preciably rise (remaining ,0.1 of the peak vasculature sig-
nal). For the FL, however, all three regions have comparable
intensities and all three regions peak within seconds after the
cardiac injection, implying no transport barriers either across
the metaphyseal vasculature or across the COJ. These types
of observations are difﬁcult to assess at the epiphyseal COJ,
where the bone structure is more scattering to light and tends
to obstruct the acquisition of clear images in this region. We
have previously shown that 10k-FL ultimately reaches the
growth plate at an amount that is 10-fold less than that of
FIGURE 5 Arrival patterns of 10k-FL and FL at the same location. Multiphoton images of the growth plate edge, the ‘‘groove of Ranvier’’, acquired ( a) 63,
(b) 168, and (c) 290 s after an IC 10k-FL injection and (d) 12, (e) 46, and (f) 93 s after a second injection, this time with FL. Note that the 10k-FL exhibits a more
circumferential arrival whereas the FL clearly enters from both bone vasculatures. Scale bar ¼ 50 mm.
Transport in Growth Plate Cartilage 1045
Biophysical Journal 93(3) 1039–1050
=== PAGE 8 ===
FL (29). The transport block at the metaphyseal COJ appears
to be the primary reason that the larger dextrans ( $10 kDa)
do not efﬁciently enter this region from the metaphyseal
vasculature, not the permeability of the vasculature itself.
Because we were unable to use neutral dextrans for this
experiment (see Materials and Methods), we could not
separate the effects of charge from those of size. However, the
FL and 10k-FL diffusion coefﬁcients were measured to be at
most twofold different in the ex vivo experiments (Fig. 3 d),
so we suspect that the transport block may be a charge effect.
DISCUSSION
Diffusion proﬁle: zonal differences within the
growth plate
Researchers have measured molecular diffusion in a wide
variety of cartilage preparations (35–42). Cartilage measure-
ments of small molecules (tetramethylrhodamine and sucrose
(35,37,39,40), 10 kDa dextrans (35,37,39,40) and 40 kDa
molecules (35–37,39) vary six-, four-, and 25-fold, respec-
tively. Our measurements lie within these ranges. We know
of only one diffusion measurement made in growth plate
cartilage—a 66 kDa albumin in the proliferative zone of a
porcine growth plate section was measured to be D ¼ 49
mm2/s (41). Our own diffusion measurements are consistent,
showing a smaller 45 kDa ova-FL in the proliferative zone of
the mouse cartilage explant with D ranging from 30 to 50
mm2/s. There has been no literature discussion of a transport
gradient along the chondrocytic differentiation axis. Our mea-
sured diffusion proﬁles are presumably indicative of consis-
tent changes in matrix structure along the growth plate axis.
Our results from in vivo and ex vivo FL diffusion mea-
surements differ in several ways. Firstly, diffusion coefﬁ-
cients were measured to be two-to-threefold higher in the
tissue sections than in the live animal (Fig. 3 d vs. Fig. 4 f).
This difference may be due to the pressures encountered in
cartilage with an intact perichondrium (43), effectively decreas-
ing the ﬂuid phase volume, which is expected to decrease
diffusion twofold (38). Secondly, the decreasing gradient of
diffusion values toward the E and M COJs is less pronounced
in the tissue sections (twofold versus ﬁvefold in the live
animal). Whether the discrepancies between the in vivo and
ex vivo measurements are real or due to experimental error is
unknown. Certainly the pressure gradients expected to exist
in the cartilage structures of live animals (44) are absent in
the ex vivo tissue. Furthermore the ex vivo measurements
FIGURE 6 10k-FL transport is effectively blocked at the metaphaseal COJ. ( a) Time series of images at 90 s intervals showing that the IC-injected 10k-FL
leaks from the metaphyseal vasculature into the primary spongiosa, but not to an appreciable degree into the cartilage. ( b) A similar series of images (12 s
intervals) after a FL injection showing that FL immediately enters the cartilage as well. Scale bar ¼ 50 mm. (c) Average intensity plotted as a function of time
for the 10k-FL series in panel a. Different regions (the vasculature, the primary spongiosa, and the cartilage just adjacent to the metaphyseal COJ) are color-
coded in red, blue, and green, respectively (see inset). Note that the ﬂuorescence peaks at 90 s in the vasculature and in the spongiosa a few minutes later. The
tracer does not signiﬁcantly enter the cartilage. ( d) A similar analysis of the FL-injected images shows that all regions peak within less than a minute.
1046 Williams et al.
Biophysical Journal 93(3) 1039–1050
=== PAGE 9 ===
are point measurements within the extracellular matrix only,
whereas the in vivo results average over both cellular and
noncellular regions. Thus the measurements will differ in the
fractional volume ( f) available for diffusion (extracellular
volume/total volume), which varies signiﬁcantly within the
different zones of the growth plate. For instance, f in the
proliferative and hypertrophic zones for this age mice was
measured to be 0.61 and 0.38, respectively (45). The effect of
the chondrocytic exclusion can be estimated using Maxwell’s
effective medium permeability approximation for randomly
dispersed spheres (46):
D
Dsoln
¼ 2f
3 /C0 f:
Using this estimation, the measured in vivo diffusion coef-
ﬁcients should be reduced to 0.51 and 0.29 as compared to
the ex vivo proliferative and hypertrophic values, respec-
tively. These reduced values agree quite well with our results
(Fig. 3 d, ex vivo and Fig. 4 d, in vivo). Discrepancies be-
tween the results may also arise from matrix degradation in
the ex vivo tissue sections or potential imaging artifacts from
decreased transmission of light by calciﬁed regions around
the COJs in the live animals. Nonetheless, similar diffusive
trends were found using two very different measurement mo-
dalities, suggesting that the matrix in the proliferative and early
hypertrophic zones is at least two-to-ﬁvefold as permissive
as that at the two COJs.
Not only does the volume of the extracellular matrix
(ECM) vary along the growth plate, the structure of the ECM
varies as well. For instance, in human rib, the collagen ultra-
structure, as visualized by EM, changes dramatically along
the growth plate axis (47) and would be expected to inﬂu-
ence transport properties. The matrix adjacent to the meta-
physeal COJ is partially calciﬁed and thus particularly dense
(48). An image analysis of EM micrographs (47) accounting
for a 30% volume reduction due to ﬁxation (49) reveals a
fractional intraﬁbrillar volume (f) available for molecular dif-
fusion in resting, proliferative, and hypertrophic zones to be
0.54, 0.82, and 0.36, respectively. The resulting diffusional
hindrance can be estimated using the Mackie and Meares
approximation (50), which accounts for a tortuosity increase
due to a polymeric matrix:
Dsoln
D ¼ 2 /C0 f
f
/C18/C19 2
:
This equation is derived assuming that the size of the dif-
fusing molecules is small compared to that of the obstacles,
which is thought to be true for proteins of MW , 70,000
in cartilage (47,51,52), alleviating the need for theories
accounting for more complex protein-matrix interactions (53).
The Mackie and Meares approximation yields a diffusional
hindrance of 7.1, 2.1, and 21 in the three regions, respectively,
which ﬁts somewhat quantitatively to the graph in Fig. 4 f,
assuming an intraﬁbrillar viscosity that is 1.8-fold increased
compared to our solution ﬂuorescein measurement of 265 6
30 mm2/s.
The resting zone contains large radial/transverse ﬁbers that
ﬁx the perichondrium into the epiphyseal bone (54). Within
the proliferating zone, the fractional intraﬁbrillar volume is
minimal. Throughout their development, chondrocytes se-
crete new matrix and upon doing so, construct an environ-
ment that ultimately deﬁnes their interactions with other cells.
After secretion of more and more matrix and after swelling
and thus reducing the available extracellular volume for dif-
fusion, hypertrophic chondrocytes can no longer commu-
nicate as freely with the perichondrium, where many of the
signaling molecules originate (Fig. 7). This self-constructed
environment may then partially deﬁne their development to-
ward hypertrophy as perichondrium-produced molecules such
as BMP2, ﬁbroblast growth factor 18, and PTHrP (4,6,9,12)
may become concentrated at the more permissive proliferative/
hypertrophic junction, the transition at which chondrocytes
commit to hypertrophy. This low-collagen density region
may represent a region where chondrocytes are particularly
susceptible to lateral cross-talk between other chondrocytes
and cells in the perichondrium. This permissive band is also
evident in gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MR images of
normal piglet hips (55), in which a dark band indicates a
faster relaxation of tipped spins at the axial midplane of the
growth plate.
In contrast at the metaphyseal COJ, the two extracellular
proteins that are crucial to vascular invasion (and subsequent
bone formation) are the angiogenic VEGFs and the ECM-
degrading MMPs. These molecules tend to be tethered to
cells or matrix elements. When both of these molecules are
soluble and freely diffusing, the resulting vessel construction
is nonviable, essentially with a bloated architecture. MMPs
and VEGF must act in concert in a targeted mode of action
for achieving a functional vessel architecture (56). In the case
of the growth plate, vessels are organized such that each new
vessel opposes the last transverse septum of the terminal hy-
pertrophic chondrocyte of each column (57). At the meta-
physeal COJ, it is primarily the matrix- and membrane-bound
(nondiffusible) VEGF and MMP isoforms that are found to
be crucial for targeted vascular invasion (13,16,22,58). MMP-9
is a diffusible protein that is involved in this process, but it
is large (92 kDa) and relatively immobile with an estimated
,10 mm2/s diffusion. It is intriguing that at the metaphyseal
COJ, where chondrocytes have already committed to dif-
ferentiation and scaffolding for bone production has already
been constructed, cellular interactions among chondrocytes,
chondroclasts, and endothelial cells are conducted in a dense
extracellular environment whe re cellular interactions are
expected to be short range. By contrast, the matrix of the
proliferating and early hypertrophic zones of the growth plate
is relatively loose and permissive, allowing access to auto-
crine interactions between chondrocytes and paracrine in-
teractions between chondrocytes and perichondrium-residing
cells.
Transport in Growth Plate Cartilage 1047
Biophysical Journal 93(3) 1039–1050
=== PAGE 10 ===
General transport patterns
In this study, we have conﬁrmed our previous study (29) de-
termining that FL tracer entry patterns (Fig. 4) show no in-
dication of a proposed unidirectional entrance to the growth
plate sourced by the epiphyseal vasculature. Though trans-
port patterns are generally symmetric from both the E and M
vasculatures, it is unknown whether the concentration of
nutrients and oxygen within the two vasculatures are equiv-
alent or whether the consumption of these molecules within
the growth plate causes a differential availability to different
populations of chondrocytes (59). Because tracers arrive to
the two vasculatures within seconds after an IC injection, the
former possibility seems improbable. The E-to-M asymmetry
in vasculature-chondrocyte communication may ultimately
stem from an as-yet unidentiﬁed diffusible survival signal
from the E vasculature.
Fluid ﬂow was found to contribute signiﬁcantly to molec-
ular transport of substances from the blood stream into the
cartilage, implying a pressure differential between the bone
vasculature and the cartilage matrix. Due to conservation of
mass, this ﬂow proﬁle from the two COJs ultimately suggests
an overall centrifugal ﬂow toward the perichondrium (though
a small percentage of the ﬂuid would be shunted to hyper-
trophic swelling.) As a result, nutrients or hormones produced
or released in the COJs would become distributed throughout
the growth plate, but molecules produced or released in the
perichondrium would tend to remain concentrated within the
more permissive central cartilage canal. Such is in fact true
for the 10k-FL transport pattern evident in Fig. 5, a–c. Note
that Fig. 5 c was acquired almost 5 min after injection and
still the tracer remains relatively concentrated adjacent to the
subperichondrial plexus from which it originated. In con-
trast, FL, which tends to enter more from the two COJs,
equilibrates through the growth plate within 90 s. (Note that
the diffusion coefﬁcient for 10k-FL is only twofold smaller
than that for FL, implying only a twofold difference in equil-
ibration times if transport in both cases were purely dif-
fusive.) The overall centrifugal ﬂow pattern is characteristic
of a resting limb only; limb stresses and movement are ex-
pected to signiﬁcantly alter cartilage pressure gradients.
Fig. 7 is a diagram of the growth plate demonstrating the
three vascular access routes, and also indicating several
molecules of biological signiﬁcance thought to be active
in autocrine and paracrine signaling pathways during the
chondrocytic differentiation cascade. In the present study,
we have used ﬂuorescent tracers as surrogates for physio-
logically meaningful molecules, and all interpretations of the
data have been made in terms of a combination of diffusion
and ﬂow within the growth plate’s ECM. Our goal for this
study was to establish a baseline understanding of transport
in this region. Clearly, our model is a simpliﬁcation of the in
vivo situation. In the living animal specializations of the
endothelial cells of each of the three access routes (including
fenestrae, caveolae, transendothelial pores, cell-to-cell junc-
tions, and speciﬁc receptors) may, in different combinations,
either restrict or facilitate entrance of a particular biological
molecule from a given vascular direction, and thus inﬂuence
its pattern of distribution within the ECM (60). Furthermore,
our tracers were chosen to be relatively biologically inert,
whereas signaling molecules are not. Binding to ECM ele-
ments and cell surfaces in selected locations would signiﬁcantly
slow molecular transport. For example, the Ihh distribution
was shown to be dramatically inﬂuenced by heparin sulfate
chains on extracellular matrix proteoglycans (17–19). In
addition, secreted molecules, such as IGF-1 or FGFs-1 or 2,
might bind to the ECM and subsequently inﬂuence the same
cell in an autocrine response later in the cell’s life span. This
would require no physical change in position of the molecule
FIGURE 7 The illustration to the left displays transport
routes critical to chondrocyte development and ultimately
bone growth (4,6,9,12). To the right, hypothesized transport
patterns within the growth plate are diagramed. Cartilage
permissivity is coded by shading around the chondrocytes,
with hindered diffusion near the two COJs. Axial ﬂow
measurements (solid lines) reveal ﬂow that is directed away
from the COJs. Draining toward the perichondrium is
presumed (dotted lines). Note that due to both the hetero-
geneous diffusion characteristics and the overall ﬂow pro-
ﬁle, perichondrium-produced molecules will be enriched in
the proliferative and early hypertrophic zones.
1048 Williams et al.
Biophysical Journal 93(3) 1039–1050
=== PAGE 11 ===
itself within the ECM; time would, in effect, negate any
requirement of movement, since the cell that originally syn-
thesized the molecule could mature and subsequently react
to it (61). An important point indicated in Fig. 7 and sup-
ported by our data is that a signaling molecule such as BMP-2,
which is produced by cells within the perichondrium, will
tend to accumulate at the relatively permissive proliferative/
hypertrophic junction (Fig. 5 a) due to ﬂow patterns that are
generally directed away from the bone. In contrast, molecules
that enter with equal facility from either the metaphyseal or
the epiphyseal bone will become distributed throughout the
growth plate (Fig. 5 b).
This research was performed in the Developmental Resource for Biophys-
ical Imaging and Opto-Electronics and was made possible by grants
R01AR052003-01 from National Institutes of Health/National Institute of
Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases and 9 P41 EB001976-16
from National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Biomedical Imaging
and Bioengineering.
REFERENCES
1. Breur, G. J., B. A. VanEnkevort, C. E. Farnum, and N. J. Wilsman.
1991. Linear relationship between the volume of hypertrophic chon-
drocytes and the rate of longitudinal bone growth in growth plates.
J. Orthop. Res. 9:348–359.
2. Hunziker, E. B., and R. K. Schenk. 1989. Physiological mechanisms
adopted by chondrocytes in regulating longitudinal bone growth in rats.
J. Physiol. 414:55–71.
3. Wilsman, N. J., C. E. Farnum, E. M. Leiferman, M. Fry, and
C. Barreto. 1996. Differential growth by growth plates as a function
of multiple parameters of chondrocytic kinetics. J. Orthop. Res. 14:
927–936.
4. Karsenty, G., and E. F. Wagner. 2002. Reaching a genetic and mo-
lecular understanding of skeletal development. Dev. Cell. 2:389–406.
5. Kornak, U., and S. Mundlos. 2003. Genetic disorders of the skeleton: a
developmental approach. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73:447–474.
6. Kronenberg, H. M. 2003. Developmental regulation of the growth
plate. Nature. 423:332–336.
7. Ortega, N., D. J. Behonick, and Z. Werb. 2004. Matrix remodeling
during endochondral ossiﬁcation. Trends Cell Biol. 14:86–93.
8. Provot, S., and E. Schipani. 2005. Molecular mechanisms of en-
dochondral bone development. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 328:
658–665.
9. van der Eerden, B. C., M. Karperien, and J. M. Wit. 2003. Systemic
and local regulation of the growth plate. Endocr. Rev. 24:782–801.
10. Chung, U. I., E. Schipani, A. P. McMahon, and H. M. Kronenberg.
2001. Indian hedgehog couples chondrogenesis to osteogenesis in
endochondral bone development. J. Clin. Invest. 107:295–304.
11. Vortkamp, A., K. Lee, B. Lanske, G. V. Segre, H. M. Kronenberg, and
C. J. Tabin. 1996. Regulation of rate of cartilage differentiation by
Indian hedgehog and PTH-related protein. Science. 273:613–622.
12. Ballock, R. T., and R. J. O’Keefe. 2003. The biology of the growth
plate. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 85A:715–726.
13. Holmbeck, K., P. Bianco, J. Caterina, S. Yamada, M. Kromer,
S. A. Kuznetsov, M. Mankani, P. G. Robey, A. R. Poole, I. Pidoux,
J. M. Ward, and H. Birkedal-Hansen. 1999. MT1-MMP-deﬁcient mice
develop dwarﬁsm, osteopenia, arthritis, and connective tissue disease
due to inadequate collagen turnover. Cell. 99:81–92.
14. Holmbeck, K., P. Bianco, I. Pidoux, S. Inoue, R. C. Billinghurst,
W. Wu, K. Chrysovergis, S. Yamada, H. Birkedal-Hansen, and
A. R. Poole. 2005. The metalloproteinase MT1-MMP is required for
normal development and maintenance of osteocyte processes in bone.
J. Cell Sci. 118:147–156.
15. Vu, T. H., J. M. Shipley, G. Bergers, J. E. Berger, J. A. Helms,
D. Hanahan, S. D. Shapiro, R. M. Senior, and Z. Werb. 1998. MMP-9/
gelatinase B is a key regulator of growth plate angiogenesis and
apoptosis of hypertrophic chondrocytes. Cell. 93:411–422.
16. Zhou, Z., S. S. Apte, R. Soininen, R. Cao, G. Y. Baaklini, R. W. Rauser,
J. Wang, Y. Cao, and K. Tryggvason. 2000. Impaired endochondral
ossiﬁcation and angiogenesis in mice deﬁcient in membrane-type
matrix metalloproteinase I. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 97:4052–4057.
17. Hilton, M. J., L. Gutierrez, D. A. Martinez, and D. E. Wells. 2005.
EXT1 regulates chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation during
endochondral bone development. Bone. 36:379–386.
18. Koziel, L., M. Kunath, O. G. Kelly, and A. Vortkamp. 2004. Ext1-
dependent heparan sulfate regulates the range of Ihh signaling during
endochondral ossiﬁcation. Dev. Cell. 6:801–813.
19. The, I., Y. Bellaiche, and N. Perrimon. 1999. Hedgehog movement is
regulated through tout velu-dependent synthesis of a heparan sulfate
proteoglycan. Mol. Cell. 4:633–639.
20. Mizutani, C. M., Q. Nie, F. Y. Wan, Y. T. Zhang, P. Vilmos, R. Sousa-
Neves, E. Bier, J. L. Marsh, and A. D. Lander. 2005. Formation of the
BMP activity gradient in the Drosophila embryo. Dev. Cell. 8:915–924.
21. Trueta, J. 1968. Studies of the Development and Decay of the Human
Frame. William Heinemann Medical Books, London.
22. Maes, C., I. Stockmans, K. Moermans, R. Van Looveren, N. Smets,
P. Carmeliet, R. Bouillon, and G. Carmeliet. 2004. Soluble VEGF
isoforms are essential for establishing epiphyseal vascularization and
regulating chondrocyte development and survival. J. Clin. Invest.
113:188–199.
23. Shapiro, I. M., K. D. Mansﬁeld, S. M. Evans, E. M. Lord, and
C. J. Koch. 1997. Chondrocytes in the endochondral growth cartilage
are not hypoxic. Am. J. Physiol. 272:C1134–C1143.
24. Schipani, E. 2005. Hypoxia and HIF-1 a in chondrogenesis. Semin.
Cell Dev. Biol. 16:539–546.
25. Ham, K. N., J. V. Hurley, G. B. Ryan, and E. Storey. 1965. Locali-
zation of particulate carbon in metaphyseal vessels of growing rats.
Aust. J. Exp. Biol. Med. Sci. 43:625–638.
26. Brown, E. B., E. S. Wu, W. Zipfel, and W. W. Webb. 1999. Measure-
ment of molecular diffusion in solution by multiphoton ﬂuorescence
photobleaching recovery. Biophys. J. 77:2837–2849.
2 7 . Z i p f e l ,W .R . ,a n dW .W .W e b b .2 0 0 1 .I nv i v od i f f u s i o nm e a s u r e m e n t s
using multiphoton excited ﬂuorescence photobleaching recovery (MPFPR)
and ﬂuorescence correlation spectroscopy (MPFCS).In Methods in Cellular
Imaging. A. Periasamy, editor. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
28. Zipfel, W. R., R. M. Williams, and W. W. Webb. 2003. Nonlinear
magic: multiphoton microscopy in the biosciences. Nat. Biotechnol.
21:1369–1377.
29. Farnum, C. E., M. Lenox, W. Zipfel, W. Horton, and R. Williams.
2006. In vivo delivery of ﬂuoresceinated dextrans to the murine growth
plate: imaging of three vascular routes by multiphoton microscopy.
Anat. Rec. A Discov. Mol. Cell. Evol. Biol. 288:91–103.
30. Xu, C., and W. W. Webb. 1996. Measurement of two-photon excita-
tion cross sections of molecular ﬂuorophores with data from 690 to
1050 nm. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B. 13:481–491.
31. Zipfel, W. R., R. M. Williams, R. Christie, A. Y. Nikitin, B. T. Hyman,
and W. W. Webb. 2003. Live tissue intrinsic emission microscopy
using multiphoton-excited native ﬂuorescence and second harmonic
generation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 100:7075–7080.
32. Crank, J. 1975. The Mathematics of Diffusion. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
33. Bevington, P. R. 2003. Data Reduction and Error Analysis for the
Physical Sciences. McGraw-Hill, Boston.
34. Atkins, P. 1994. Physical Chemistry. W. H. Freeman and Company,
New York.
35. Boubriak, O. A., J. P. Urban, S. Akhtar, K. M. Meek, and A. J. Bron.
2000. The effect of hydration and matrix composition on solute dif-
fusion in rabbit sclera. Exp. Eye Res. 71:503–514.
Transport in Growth Plate Cartilage 1049
Biophysical Journal 93(3) 1039–1050
=== PAGE 12 ===
36. Leddy, H. A., and F. Guilak. 2003. Site-speciﬁc molecular diffusion in
articular cartilage measured using ﬂuorescence recovery after photo-
bleaching. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 31:753–760.
37. Maroudas, A. 1970. Distribution and diffusion of solutes in articular
cartilage. Biophys. J. 10:365–379.
38. Nimer, E., R. Schneiderman, and A. Maroudas. 2003. Diffusion and partition
of solutes in cartilage under static load.Biophys. Chem.106:125–146.
39. Quinn, T. M., P. Kocian, and J. J. Meister. 2000. Static compression is
associated with decreased diffusivity of dextrans in cartilage explants.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 384:327–334.
40. Quinn, T. M., V. Morel, and J. J. Meister. 2001. Static compression of
articular cartilage can reduce solute diffusivity and partitioning: implica-
tions for the chondrocyte biological response.J. Biomech. 34:1463–1469.
41. Sniekers, Y. H., and C. C. van Donkelaar. 2005. Determining diffusion
coefﬁcients in inhomogeneous tissues using ﬂuorescence recovery after
photobleaching. Biophys. J. 89:1302–1307.
42. Torzilli, P. A., J. M. Arduino, J. D. Gregory, and M. Bansal. 1997.
Effect of proteoglycan removal on solute mobility in articular cartilage.
J. Biomech. 30:895–902.
43. Wong, M., and D. R. Carter. 2003. Articular cartilage functional
histomorphology and mechanobiology: a research perspective. Bone.
33:1–13.
44. Grodzinsky, A. J., M. E. Levenston, M. Jin, and E. H. Frank. 2000.
Cartilage tissue remodeling in response to mechanical forces. Annu.
Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2:691–713.
45. Bailon-Plaza, A., A. O. Lee, E. C. Veson, C. E. Farnum, and M. C. van
der Meulen. 1999. BMP-5 deﬁciency alters chondrocytic activity in the
mouse proximal tibial growth plate. Bone. 24:211–216.
46. Cussler, E. 1984. Diffusion: Mass Transfer in Fluid Systems. Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge.
47. Keene, D. R., J. T. Oxford, and N. P. Morris. 1995. Ultrastructural
localization of collagen types II, IX, and XI in the growth plate of
human rib and fetal bovine epiphyseal cartilage: type XI collagen is
restricted to thin ﬁbrils. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 43:967–979.
48. Hunziker, E. B., and W. Herrmann. 1990. Ultrastructure of cartilage. In
Ultrastructure of Skeletal Tissues. E. Bonucci and P. M. Motta, editors.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA.
49. Richards, R. G., and M. J. Kaab. 1996. Microwave-enhanced ﬁxation
of rabbit articular cartilage. J. Microsc. 181:269–276.
50. Mackie, J., and P. Meares. 1955. The diffusion of electrolytes in a
cation-exchange resin membrane. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A. 232:498–509.
51. Guiot, E., M. Enescu, B. Arrio, G. Johannin, G. Roger, S. Tosti,
F. Tﬁbel, F. Merola, A. Brun, P. Georges, and M. P. Fontaine-Aupart.
2000. Molecular dynamics of biological probes by ﬂuorescence
correlation microscopy with two-photon excitation. J. Fluoresc. 10:
413–419.
52. Ramanujan, S., A. Pluen, T. D. McKee, E. B. Brown, Y. Boucher,
and R. K. Jain. 2002. Diffusion and convection in collagen gels:
implications for transport in the tumor interstitium. Biophys. J. 83:
1650–1660.
53. Pluen, A., P. A. Netti, R. K. Jain, and D. A. Berk. 1999. Diffusion of
macromolecules in agarose gels: comparison of linear and globular
conﬁgurations. Biophys. J. 77:542–552.
54. Speer, D. P. 1989. The growth plate: structure and function. In
Principles of Orthopedic Practice. R. Dee, E. Mango, and L. C. Hurst,
editors. McGraw-Hill, New York.
55. Jaramillo, D., S. A. Connolly, S. Vajapeyam, R. L. Robertson,
P. S. Dunning, R. V. Mulkern, A. Hayward, S. E. Maier, and F. Shapiro.
2003. Normal and ischemic epiphysis of the femur: diffusion MR
imaging study in piglets. Radiology. 227:825–832.
56. Lee, S., S. M. Jilani, G. V. Nikolova, D. Carpizo, and M. L. Iruela-
Arispe. 2005. Processing of VEGF-A by matrix metalloproteinases
regulates bioavailability and vascular patterning in tumors. J. Cell Biol.
169:681–691.
57. Farnum, C. E., and N. J. Wilsman. 1989. Cellular turnover at the
chondro-osseous junction of growth plate cartilage: analysis by serial
sections at the light microscopical level. J. Orthop. Res. 7:654–666.
58. Zelzer, E., W. McLean, Y. S. Ng, N. Fukai, A. M. Reginato,
S. Lovejoy, P. A. D’Amore, and B. R. Olsen. 2002. Skeletal defects in
VEGF(120/120) mice reveal multiple roles for VEGF in skeleto-
genesis. Development. 129:1893–1904.
59. Grunhagen, T., G. Wilde, D. M. Soukane, S. A. Shirazi-Adl, and
J. P. Urban. 2006. Nutrient supply and intervertebral disc metabolism.
J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 88(Suppl 2):30–35.
60. Olsson, A. K., A. Dimberg, J. Kreuger, and L. Claesson-Welsh. 2006.
VEGF receptor signaling—in control of vascular function. Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol. 7:359–371.
61. Re, R. N., and J. L. Cook. 2006. An intracrine view of angiogenesis.
Bioessays. 28:943–953.
1050 Williams et al.
Biophysical Journal 93(3) 1039–1050