=== PAGE 1 ===
Supplementary Materials for
A transcriptional atlas of the pubertal human growth plate reveals two 
populations of stem cells and direct effect of growth hormone
Nelson Tsz Long Chu et al.
Corresponding author: Andrei S. Chagin, andrei.chagin@gu.se
Sci. Transl. Med. 18, eadw3590 (2026)
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adw3590
The PDF file includes:
Materials and Methods
Figs. S1 to S10
Tables S1 and S2
Legends for data files S1 to S7
References (62–67)
Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following:
Data files S1 to S7
MDAR Reproducibility Checklist
=== PAGE 2 ===
Supplemental Materials and Methods 
Research participants 
The surgical removal of the growth plates, known as epiphysiodesis, was performed on healthy 
adolescent children with predicted tall stature in accordance with local paediatric guidelines.  The study 
cohort included ten participants aged 11–14 years, encompassing both sexes. Sex was determined based 
on self-reporting. Consent has b een obtained for sharing individu al-level data. Detailed patient 
information is provided in Table S1. All patients were monitored, and all surgerie s were conducted at 
Karolinska University Hospital, Sweden. The collection of human growth plate biopsies post-surgery 
was approved by the local human ethics committee (permission number is 97-214, Karolinska Institutet 
Research Ethics Committee North,  Karolinska University Hospital,  Stockholm, Sweden). Written 
informed consent was obtained from all patients and their parents, and the process was documented in 
hospital records. The adolescent patient samples, due to diffic ulty in their availability, were limited to 
patients with tall stature and a n eed for epiphysiodesis surgery. Patient samples were given random 
numbers during the experiment.  Race and ethnicity was not considered in this study . All the patient 
material was collected in Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Animals 
The mouse strains used here are commercially available: Prrx1-CreERT (JAX #  005584), R26R-
Confetti (JAX # 013731), All animal experiments were approved in advance by the Stockholm North 
Ethical Committee or the Gothenburg Animal Ethics Board ( Göteborgs djurförsöksetiska nämnd, 
4030/21) and were conducted in accordance with the regulations of the Swedish Board of Agriculture. 
Tamoxifen was administered at a dose of 100 µg per g body weight.  Both sex was taken into 
consideration. Animals were housed 2-5 per cage and kept on a 12-hour light-dark cycle, with food and 
water at room temperature (25 degrees Celsius). 
Collection of Human Growth Plate slices from Biopsies 
Human growth plate biopsies were obtained duri ng epiphysiodesis surgery by an experienced 
orthopaedic surgeon under live X-ray guidance. Immediately after excision, the biopsies were 
transported on ice to the laboratory for further processing. Under sterile conditions and on ice, 
cylindrical biopsies were sectioned perpendicularl y to their longitudinal axis into 1–2 mm slices 
in  Hank's Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS) with a sharp scalpel.  
To obtain slices containing the secondary ossification centre (SOC), the growth plate, and the primary 
spongiosa (POC), growth plate slices were carefully  examined and selected with a stereomicroscope. 
To minimize slice-to-slice variation, slices with POC or SOC only were excluded from explant culture 
experiment. The selected slices were then allocated for either immediate analysis (fixed or digested for 
single-cell RNA sequencing [scRNA-seq]) or for explant culture. 
Human Growth Plate Explant Culture 
For organ culture experiments, explants were maintained at 37°C with  5% carbon dioxide in a culture 
medium consisting of DMEM/F12 (without phenol red), gentamycin (20 µg/ml), 0.2% bovine serum 
albumin (BSA), β-glycerophosphate (1 mM), ascorbic acid (5 µg/ml), and 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 
as previously described (43, 58). 
Long-term cultures: To provide proof-of-principle evidence of direct growth hormone (GH) action, 
slices were cultured in medium supplemented with or without 40 ng/ml of human recombinant GH 
(Norditropin, Novo Nordisk) for 2 months. The medium was replaced every 2–3 days using 3 ml per 
well in a 6-well dish. At the end of the culture period,  the slices were washed with ice-cold 1X PBS, 
fixed overnight in ROTI®Histofix (Carl Roth, Art. No. 8907.1), and processed for histological analysis. 
=== PAGE 3 ===
Short-term cultures : To elucidate the mechanisms of GH action, human growth plate slices were 
cultured for 24 hours with or without 40 ng/ml of GH. Following culture, slices were washed with ice-
cold PBS, dissected from bone under a stereo microscope, and either processed for single-cell 
preparation or fixed for histological analysis as described above.  
Tissue Processing for mouse and human samples 
Fixed samples were processed for either paraffin  or frozen sectioning. Paraffin embedding and 
sectioning were performed according to standard protocols.  
For frozen sections, tissues were dehydrated using a methanol gradient (Methanol Puriss 99.85%, 
Histolab, Cat. No. 02095) at concentrations of 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, and 100%. Each step involved 
incubation for 1 hour at 4°C with gentle agitation. Following dehydration, tissues were delipidated using 
dichloromethane (Merck, Cat. No. D65100) for 3 hours at 4°C, then rehydration through a reverse 
methanol gradient (100%, 80%, 40%) before incubation in 2X SSCT (ROTI®Stock 20x SSC, Carl 
Roth, Cat. No. 1054.1) for 1 hour per step at 4°C.  
Subsequently, the tissu es were decalcified in 10 % EDTA (Merck, Cat. No. E6511) for two nights at 
4°C with gentle agitation, with th e solution replaced daily. Decalcif ied tissues were then incubated 
overnight in 30% sucrose (Merck, Cat. No. S0389) solution prepared in 1X PBS until the samples sank. 
Finally, processed human growth plate specimens were embedded in OCT compound (Tissue-Tek® 
O.C.T. Compound, Sakura, Cat. No. 4583), snap frozen on dry ice, and stored at -80°C until sectioning.
Mouse were euthanized by overdose of isoflurane; after which the hind legs were removed and fixed in 
4% formaldehyde in PBS for 6 h or overnight at 4 °C with on a roller mixer. The samples were then 
decalcified in 10% EDTA, incubated overnight in 30% sucrose, and embedded in OCT. Sections 30-
100 μm thick were prepared at -20 ℃ and examined under a Zeiss LSM700/LSM880 fluorescence 
microscope.  
Multiplex Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization with RNAscope 
Multiplex fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was perfor med using the RN Ascope Multiplex 
Fluorescent V2 Assay (ACD, Cat. No. 323100) and the RNAscope® 4- plex Ancillary Kit (ACD; Cat. 
No. 323120) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines, with minor modifications. Tissue sections 
were rehydrated, treated with hydrogen peroxide provi ded in the kit, and subjec ted to target retrieval 
buffer by heating in appropriate buffer. Sections were  then digested with pepsin prior to hybridization 
with target probes, which were incubated overnight at 40°C.  
The following probes were used: Hs-CYTL1 (ACD; Cat. No. 1042661-C1), Hs-INHBA (ACD; Cat. 
No. 415111-C2), Hs-SFRP5 (ACD; Cat. No. 1056891-C4), Hs-DCN (ACD; Cat. No. 589521-C4), Ms-
Prrx1-C2 (ACD; Cat. No. 485231-C2), Ms-Pthlh-C2 (ACD; Cat. No. 456521-C2), Ms-Sfrp5-C4 (ACD; 
Cat. No.  405001-C4), Ms-Cytl1 (ACD; Cat No. 817241). Signal amplification and detection were 
performed using TSA Plus fluorophore kits (PerkinElmer, Cat. Nos. NEL744001KT and 
NEL745001KT) at a dilution of 1:800, followed by counterstaining with DAPI. Fluorescence signals 
were detected and visualized using a Nikon spinning disk confocal microscope. 
Multiplex Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization with Hybridization Chain Reaction (HCR) 
Detection of collagen mRNA transcripts was performed using Hybridization Chain Reaction (HCR) 
according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Molecular Instruments,  USA). HCR was used instead of 
RNAscope for abundant transcripts for economic reasons. Briefly,  tissue sections were dehydrated 
using an ethanol gradient and digested with Proteinase K to unmask mRNA transcripts. After pre-
hybridization, sections were incubated with 2 µL of oligo pool probes in hybridization buffer 
(Molecular Instruments, USA) at 37°C overnight.  
Following hybridization, sections were washed three times in probe wash buffer for 5 minutes each. 
HCR amplifier hairpin pairs were prepared by heating in separate PCR tubes to 95°C and then cooling 
=== PAGE 4 ===
to 25°C for 30 minutes. Amplification was performed by incubating the sections with HCR amokifiers 
in amplification buffer (Molecular Instruments, USA) overnight at room temperature. Following 
amplification, tissue sections were washed four times with 5X SSCT for 10 minutes each and 
subsequently mounted in Fluoroshield containing Hoechst 34580 for nuclear counterstaining.  
Histological Staining: Hematoxylin, Eosin, Safranin-O, Fast Green, and Trichrome 
Hydrated tissue sections were washed with 1X PBS followed by distilled water. Sections were stained 
with Mayer’s Hematoxylin (Histola b) for 1 minute and rinsed three times with distilled water. The 
sections were developed to a bluish color using 1X PBS. Subsequently, sections were counterstained 
with Eosin G (Histolab) for 30 seconds, dehydrated through a graded ethanol series, and mounted using 
Depex (Sigma, Cat. No. 06522). 
For Safranin-O and Fast Green staining, hydrated sec tions were rinsed in di stilled water and stained 
with Weigert’s Iron Hematoxylin fo r 5 minutes to label nuclei, followe d by four washes with water, 
and a brief dip (2 seconds) in Acid-Alcohol solu tion (1% HCl in 70% ethanol). Sections were then 
stained with 0.02% Fast Green for 1 minute and immersed in 1% acetic acid (in 70% ethanol) for 30 
seconds. Thereafter, sections we re stained with 1% Sa franin-O for 10 minute s to label cartilage, 
dehydrated in absolute ethanol, cleared with HistoClear (Histolab), and mounted. 
Trichrome staining was performed using the Trichrome Staining Kit (Abcam, Cat. No. ab150686) 
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 
Immunofluorescence Staining 
Phospho-Protein Immunostaining: Tissue sections (6 µm) were thawed and dried at room temperature 
for 30 minutes, then rinsed with  1X PBS twice for 5 minutes each to remove residual OCT. Antigen 
unmasking was performed using An tigen Unmasking Solution, Citrat e-Based (Vector Labs, Cat. No. 
H-3300-250) at 55°C overnight instead of boiling to prevent section detach ment. After retrieval th e
citrate b
uffer was removed by washing in 1X PB S. Hydrophobic barriers were drawn around th e
sections. Blo
cking was carried out with 2.5% normal horse serum (ImmPRESS® HRP Anti-Rabbit IgG
Polymer Det
ection Kit, Peroxidase , Vector Labs, Cat. No. MP-7401 ). Primary antibodie s targeting
specific antigens (rabbit-hoste
d) were incubated overnight at 4°C in 3% BSA prepared in 1X TBS. After
incubation, the sections were washed three times in 1X TBS, each wash lasting 3 minutes. The sections
w
ere subsequently incubated with ImmPRESS Peroxidase Polymer Anti-Rabbit IgG Reagent for 1 hour
at room temperature, followed by three 3-minute  washes in 1X TBS. Fluorescent signals were
developed using the TSA Cyanine 5 System (Akoya Biosciences, Cat. No. NEL705A001KT) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sections were mounted in Fluoroshield containing Hoechst 34580
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. H21486) for nuclear fluorescence visualization.
Non-Phospho Protein Immunolabeling: For immunolabeling of non-phospho proteins, sections were 
washed with 1X PBS and blocked using 3% BSA in 1X TBS. Primary antibodies, diluted in blocking 
buffer, were applied and incubated overnight at 4°C. After three 3-minutes washes in 1x PBS, sections 
were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with fluorescence-conjugated secondary antibodies 
matching the host species of the primary antibodies. Finally, sections  were washed three times in 1X 
PBS for 3 minutes and mounted with Fluoroshield containing Hoechst 34580 for nuclear fluorescence. 
Details of the antibodies and their sources used in this manuscript are provided in Table S2. 
EdU (5-Ethynyl-2-deoxyuridine) Labelling for Proliferating Cells in Organ Cultures 
=== PAGE 5 ===
EdU, a thymidine analogue that is  incorporated into DNA during replication, was used to label 
proliferating cells in human growth plate (hGP) explants. EdU was added to the hGP explant culture 
medium at a concentration of 10 mM for 24 hours prior to tissue collection.   
For EdU detection on tissue sections, samples were permeabilized using 0.5% Triton X-100 in 1X PBS 
for 20 minutes and then washed twice with 3% BSA in 1X PBS. The EdU reaction mixture was prepared 
as follows: 100 µL of 1 M Tris (pH 7.5), 20 µL of 100 mM CuSO ₄, 0.1 µL of Alexa-azide 647, 680 
µL of ddH₂O. Immediately before use, 200 µL of 0.5 M ascorbic acid was added. Sections were 
incubated in the reaction mixture for 30 minutes at  room temperature, followed by two 5-min washes 
in 3% BSA in 1X PBS. Finally, sections were mounted with Fluoroshield containing Hoechst 34580, 
and images were acquired using a confocal microscope. 
Image Acquisition and Processing 
Fluorescence images were acquired using a Nikon Ti2-E inverted microscope equipped with a CrEST 
X-light V3 spinning disk. Hoechst 34580, Alexa Fluor 488, 546, 647, Cy3, and Cy5, were excited with
405, 477, 520, 546, and 638 nm lasers, respectively. Images were captured using a 20x Nikon CFI60
Plan Apochromat Lambda objective. Z-stack images we re collected at 4 µm intervals over a depth of
20–40 µm, from tissue sections with a thickness of 6 µm. Tile scans were automatically stitched during
acquisition and exported in ND2 file format. For image processing and visua lization, ND2 files were
converted to IMARIS format (IMS) using Imaris Co nverter 10.0. Images intended for the manuscript
were subsequently exported as TIF files.
Isolation of s
ingle cells for single-cell RNA sequencing (Human) 
Growth plate slices were dissected free from bone under a stereomicroscope, mechanically minced into 
small fragments, transferred to fresh ice-cold HBSS, and thoroughly pipetted to remove residual blood. 
HBSS was then replaced with a di gestion solution consisting of Colla genase P (3 U/mL, Roche) and 
TrypLE™ Select Enzyme (1×, Ther mo Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. A1217701) in HBSS. Samples were 
incubated for 30–40 min at 37 °C with shaking at 120 rpm, and tissue fragments were disrupted every 
10 min using a 1-mL pipette. 
Enzymatic digestion was stopped by adding 10 mL of 2% FBS in cold HBSS, followed by 
centrifugation at 300 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was carefully discarded, and the cell 
pellet was resuspended in 100 µL 2% FBS in 1× PBS. Ice-cold methanol (400 µL) was added dropwise, 
and the suspension was kept on ice for 10 min. Fixed cells were stored at −80 °C for up to six months 
prior to library preparation. 
Isolation of single cells for single-cell RNA sequencing (Mouse) 
To obtain single-cell su spensions from murine epiphyseal cartilage, cells were isolated from the 
proximal tibiae of six C57BL/6 mice. Following euthanasia by isoflurane overdose, tibiae were 
carefully dissected and placed in ice-cold HBSS (H6648, Sigma). Surrounding muscle and soft tissues 
were meticulously removed. All small pieces of bone and cartilage were then transferred to fresh HBSS 
and thoroughly pipetted to remove residual blood. 
Samples were subsequently  transferred to 15-mL Falcon tubes containing 2.5 mL Collagenase P (3 
U/mL, Roche) in HBSS and incubated for 30–40 min at 37 °C with shaking at 120 rpm. During 
enzymatic digestion, tibial fragments were mechanically disrupted every 10 min using a 1-mL pipette. 
After digestion, the suspension was mixed thoroughly, and 10 mL of 2% FBS in HBSS was added, 
followed by centrifugation at 300 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was carefully aspirated, and 
the cell pellet was resuspen ded in 0.5–1 mL of 2% FBS in HBSS. Finally, the suspension was passed 
through cell-strainer caps to obtain a single-cell suspension, which was used directly for 10x Genomics 
scRNA-seq. All procedures, except the digestion step at 37 °C, were carried out on ice. 
=== PAGE 6 ===
Pr
eprocessing for Single-Cell Library Preparation 
rior to single-cell library preparation, frozen cell suspensions were retrieved from −80 °C and thawed. 
Cells were pelleted at 1,000 rpm, resuspended, and washed twice in 3× SSCT containing 2% FBS and 
50 U RNaseOUT™ Recombinant Ribonuclease Inhi bitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat. No. 
10777019) to remove residual methanol. The suspension was then passed through 70-µm cell-strainer 
caps to eliminate extracellular matrix debris, centrifuged at 1,000 rpm, and resuspended in 1× PBS 
supplemented with 3% BSA. 
For purification, the cell suspension was sorted on a BD FACS Aria Fusion using a 100-µm nozzle (for 
human cells), with debris excl uded based on FSC-H versus SSC -H gating. Cell viability and 
concentration were assessed using a Countess II Automated Cell Coun ter (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
Cat. No. AMQAX1000R) according to the manufact urer’s instructions. Processed cells were 
immediately subjected to single-cell library preparation. 
10X Genomics scRNA-sequencing 
Single-cell libraries were genera ted according to the manufacturer’s instructions using the Chromium 
Next GEM Single Cell 3' Kit v3.1 (Cat. No. 1000269) and the Chromium Next GEM Chip G Single 
Cell Kit (Cat. No. 1000127). Samples in which emulsion generation failed were excluded from further 
analysis. Uncultured, vehicle-treated, and growth hormone–treated cells were indexed separately and 
pooled for sequencing on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 or NovaSeq X platform at a target depth of 20,000 
reads per cell. Library quality was assessed using a Bioanalyzer to verify in tegrity and suitability for 
sequencing. 
Bioinformatic Analysis 
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data processing (human)  
Raw FASTQ reads were processed using CellRanger (LINK) to generate gene expression matrices. To 
distinguish nascent from mature mRNA reads, Ve locyto was applied. The resulting matrices were 
analyzed with the Scanpy Python package. Only protein-coding genes were retained for downstream 
analysis. Reads were filtered based on quality control (QC) metrics, normalized for sequencing depth, 
log-transformed, and scaled. Potential doublets were identified and removed using Scrublet, and highly 
variable genes were selected. Dimensionality reduction was performed via principal component 
analysis (PCA), followed by batch correction using Harmony. A k-nearest neighbor graph was 
constructed from PCA coordinates and used for Leid en clustering and UMAP  embedding to identify 
and isolate cartilage cells for further analysis. Ce ll cycle stage was identifie d with the built-in cell 
scoring tool and the routinely used list of specific markers.  
For improved integration, isolated cartilage cells were processed using the scVI suite, which employs a 
variational autoencoder framework ( 62). The latent representation obt ained from scVI was used to 
construct a neighbor graph for Leiden clustering and UMAP 2D embedding. Covariates, including heat 
shock response genes and cell cycle scores, were incorporated during model training to account for 
biological variability. 
Analysis Pipelines (references are provided in the main text) 
1. RNA Velocity
RNA splicing velocity analysis was performed using the UniTVelo package. Under the unified
mod
e, he model estimates velocity of each gene and updates cell time based on phase portraits
co
ncurrently. This approach prioritizes spliced reads, which results in better alignment with
th
e rest of the analysis. Scvelo was used to infer terminal states (root/end points) (63)
=== PAGE 7 ===
2. Decoupler
Active transcription factors (TFs) were inferred using Decoupler, which applies a univariate 
linear model to test whether known downstream genes are upregulated for each TF. (64)
3. SCENIC Analysis 
Regulons—d efined as transcription factors (TFs) and their putative target genes—were  
inferred using pySCENIC. Only activating and annotated motifs were retained, resulting in 
219 active TFs. After intersecting these with Decoupler results, 147 TFs remained. Cell-wise 
enrichment scores (AUC) were computed, and average regulon activity was calculated for 
each cluster. The top 20 regulons, ranked by absolute differences in mean AUC scores across 
clusters, were visualized as heatmaps. Jensen–Shannon divergence was leveraged to identify 
regulons specifically concentrated in each cluster (Regulon Specificity Score) (27).
4. Differentiation Trajectory Analysis
ScFates was used to infer a principal graph on 2D cell embeddings, with cells softly assigned 
to neighboring nodes. The previously determined differentiation trajectory was utilized to set 
root and end nodes, after which pseudotime scoring  was associated with the linear graph. 
After identifying a set of genes or regulons significantly associated with pseudotime 
progression, the expressions were modeled as a function of position along the graph. This 
allowed us to identify and sort features changing with pseudotime.
5. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
Scanpy's built-in rank_genes_groups method (Wilcoxon statistics) identified highly  expressed 
genes for each cluster. p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-
Hochberg approach. Enriched gene sets were identified by g:Profiler (LINK) via mapping 
genes with significant change in expression against the Enrichr Reactome Pathways 2024 
database (65).
6. BiVI
BiVI was used to explore the transcription and splicing kinetics of RNA molecules. Unspliced 
and spliced layers were concatenated as specified by the authors. biVI model was set up as a 
"bursty" type and trained over 100 epochs. Expression dynamics parameters, burst size and 
relative degradation rate, were inferred from th e trained model. Bayes Factor cutoff of 1.0 and 
Log-fold change threshold of 0.7 were used to filter genes with clear regulation modes.
7. GP1 vs GP2 comparison
Differentially expressed genes between gp1 and gp2 were identified using DESeq2 (66), and 
results were visualized as volcano plots. The genes with log fold change > 1, adjusted p-value 
< 0.05 were mapped with g:Profiler (67).
8. Ligand-Receptor Pair Analysis
The LIANA library was used to identify ligand–receptor (LR) pairs expressed across cell 
clusters (41). Depth-normalized and log-transformed expression matrices served as input. 
LIANA’s rank_aggregate framework integrated multiple prediction methods to rank LR pairs 
by interaction strength and specificity, highlighting the most biologically relevant signaling 
events.
9. Ambient RNA Correction
Cultured samples showed signs of ambient RNA contamination, which was corrected
using Cell Bender at the level of reads with default settings. Genes highly expressed in
=== PAGE 8 ===
"empty" 10X beads were identified from unfiltered Cell Ranger outputs for the cultured 
samples and excluded from DEG analysis results. 
10. Annotation of the cultured samples
Cultured samples were annotated by matching them to populations defined in directly
sequenced tissues using the scANVI library, which expands the scVI autoencoder-based
bayesian modeling by adding partially known cell labels and cell states as latent variables.
After training, the model predicts the missing cell labels based on the latent space parameters.
11. Protein-Protein Interaction Analysis
Corneto was used to investigate potential pathways linking GHR stimulation to TFs identified
by pySCENIC and Decoupler. Protein-protein interactions from the OmniPath database were
queried using GHR as input and and the top 20 TFs up- and down-regulated upon GH
treatment as outputs. The Gurobi solver (academic license) was employed for imputation.
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data processing (mouse) 
Cells were filtered and processed using the same pipeline applied to human samples. After quality 
filtering, approximately 4,500 cells and 16,000 genes were retained. Cell types were annotated by the 
expression of known marker genes. 
Growth plate chondrocyte cluster (~1,500 cells) was isolated for further analysis. Since proliferation 
signatures distorted cell embeddings and clustering, we regressed out their effect by adjusting for G2M 
and S phase scores, calculated from the combined expression of associated genes. For the Leiden 
algorithm based clustering step, resolution of 0.5 was selected. Embeddings for a range of other 
resolution values are shown in supplementary materials. 
Differential expression analysis between GP1 and GP2 clusters was performed using DESeq2. Adjusted 
log-fold changes and p-values were used to construct volcano plots. Significantly up- and 
downregulated genes were mapped to known KEGG (64) murine pathways using g:Profiler. 
All references are integrated into the main manuscript file 
=== PAGE 9 ===

=== PAGE 10 ===
Figure S1. Cellular heterogeneity and molecular characteristics of the human growth plate. 
(A) UMAP 
embedding, clustering, and annotation of a ll cells that passed quality control. ( B) UMAP
embedding showing patient represen tation across clusters, with four patients color-coded to visualize
dis
tribution and inter-individual variability. (C) Total RNA transcripts per cell visualized on the UMAP
embedding, indicating transcript abundance across clusters. ( D) Scatter plot showing the number of
genes detected versus total gene counts per cell (log scale), illust rating transcriptional activity an d
sequencing q
uality. (E) Heatmap of the top four differentially expressed genes (DEGs) for each cluster
from (A),
 highlighting cluster-specific gene signatures. (F to H) Feature plots illustrating chondrocyte-
enriched expression of ACAN (Aggrecan) (F), SOX9  (G), and COL2A1  (H) mRNAs, classical
chondrocyte markers. ( I) UMAP embedding showing COL2A1 mRNA expression in  the
co
mputationally isolated chondrocyte cluster. ( J) Chondrocyte subcluster granularity at varyin g
res
olutions, with the selected resolutio n indicated for subsequent analyses. ( K) Heatmap showin g
ex
pression of the top 10 DEGs across reclustered human chondrocytes. (L) Patient representation across
c
lusters of human growth plate chondrocytes, showing individual sample contributions. (M) Total RNA
transcripts per cell within s
equenced chondrocytes, indicating transcript abundance across the dataset.
Scales in F, G, and H show the number of transcripts, normalized to the sequencing depth in C.
=== PAGE 11 ===

=== PAGE 12 ===
Figure S2. Cellular and histological characterization of the pubertal human growth plate. 
(A) UM
AP embedding of human growth plate chondrocyt es, reproduced from Fig. 1E for orientation.
(B to D) Feature plots showing (B) cells in S and G2/M cell-cycle phases, MEF2C (C), and POSTN (D)
mRN
A expression. (E and F) Pseudotime (E) and latent time (F) derived from RNA velocity analysis,
mapped onto the 
UMAP em bedding to illustrate dynamic transc riptional trajector ies and temporal
progression of chondrocyte differentiation. ( G to K ) Representative histological images of a human
pubertal growth plate from one of the study participants, stained with H&E (G, H, I, K) or Masson’ s
trichrome (J). Panels
 include a low-magnification overview (G) and high-magnification views of
individual zones: resting zone (H, J), proliferative zone (I), and hypertrophic zone (K). Dashed lin es
in
dicate boundaries between zones. PS – primary spongiosa. ( L) Histological comparison of archived
growth plate samples from children with idiopathic tall stature and normal-height children undergoing
leg-length correction surgery, both showing a prom inently enlarged resting zone. Dashed lin es and
d
ouble arrows delineate the resting zone in each sample. Scale bars, 200 m (G), 50 m (H, I, J, K),
and 100 m (L).
=== PAGE 13 ===

=== PAGE 14 ===
Figure S3. Additional 
transcriptional and spatial characterization of the human growth plate. 
(A) Hea
tmap showing variation in collagen gene expression along the differentiation trajectory defined
in Fig. 2B. ( B) Representative immunofluorescence image of collagen II (red); nuclei counterstained
with DAPI (blue). ( C) Hybridization chain reaction (HCR) image showing collagen X mRNA (red )
dis
tribution. (D and E) HCR images of collagen III mRNA (green) showing expression at the resting-
to-proliferative zone border (D) and at higher magnification within the resting zone (E). ( F and G )
UMAP embeddings ill
ustrating predicted regulon activity of ATF4 (F) and MEF2C (G), ob tained by
projecting activity 
of SCENIC-identified regulons along the differen tiation trajectory from Fig. 2B to
highlight zone-specific transcription factor activation. ( H and I) Representative immunofluorescence
images showing protein localizatio n of ATF4 (H) and MEF2C (I) in human growth plate sections,
consistent with predicted regulon activity. Nuclei counterstained with DAPI (blue). RZ, resting zone;
PZ, proliferative zone; HZ, hypertrophic zone; PS, primary spongiosa. ( J) Heatmap of KLF-fa mily
transcription 
factor regulon activ ity along the differentiation traj ectory (Fig. 2B), demonstratin g
dy
namic changes in KLF activation across growth plate zones. ( K to P) Feature plots showing actua l
(d
epth-normalized) mRNA expression of CLIP2 (K), CLU (L), GREM1 (M), GAS1 (N), ASS1 (O), and
NR4A1 (P), markers selected from Fig. 3D. ( Q) Representative confocal image showing spatial
distribution of SFRP5 mRNA (red) and CYTL1 mRNA (green) across the fu ll thickness of the human
growth plate. mRNAs were detected by RNAscope; nuclei counterstained with DAPI (blue). ( R)
Rep
resentative confocal image sh owing spatial distribution of RA MP3 protein (yellow) and CYTL1
protein (green) across the entire human growth plate. Proteins were detected by immunofluorescence ;
nuclei counte
rstained with DAPI (blue). Panels (Q) and (R) show neighbouring sections from the same
patient, illus
trating differences between CYTL1 mRNA and protein distribution. Scale bars, 150 m
(B)
, 70 m (C), 50 m  (D), 20 m (E), 100 m (H, I), 200 m  (Q), and 400 m (R).
=== PAGE 15 ===

=== PAGE 16 ===
F
igure S4. Detailed analysis of the TGFβ pathway in the human growth plate. 
(A and B) Heatmaps showing scaled expression of genes of the TGFβ pathway (identified in Fig. 3Q), 
manually grouped according to predicted regulation of SMAD2/3/4 signaling (TGF β pathway) (A) or 
SMAD1/5/8 signaling (BMP pathway) (B). The scale shows z-scaled gene expression scores, scaled 
within genes to facilitate comparison across clusters. (C and D) Scatter plots ranking regulon specificity 
predicted by SCENIC in the GP1 (C) and GP2 (D) clusters. (E) Histogram showing the mean SMAD2 
regulon activity (AUC scor e) across chondrocyte subsets, revealing differential activation of TGF β 
signaling. (F) Volcano plot comparing TGFβ pathway genes (panel A) between GP1 and GP2 clusters. 
Genes significantly elevated in GP1 are shown in red; the single gene significantly elevated in GP2, 
THBS3, is shown in blue. ( G) Heatmap showing the highest-abundance TGF β pathway genes (from 
panel A) without within-gene scalin g, allowing direct comparison of relative expression levels across 
chondrocyte subsets. Scale, z-scaled expression scores, normalized to the sequencing depth.  
=== PAGE 17 ===

=== PAGE 18 ===
Fig
ure S5. Transcriptional characterization of juvenile murine growth plate. 
(A) UM
AP clustering of all cells obtained from microdissected tibial growth plates of 28-day-old mice
that passed quality control. ( B and C) Feature plots showing expression of Aggrecan ( Acan) (B) and
Col2a1 (C) mRNAs, classical chondrocyte markers. (D to H ) Feature plots of the computationa lly
isolated ch
ondrocyte cluster showing expression of Col2a1 mRNA (D), total reads (E), samp le
re
presentation (F), and expression of Col9a1  (G) and Sox9 (H). Scales in B, C, D, G, H, show the
number of reads normalized to the sequencing depth in E. (I) Feature plots showing UMAP re-clustering
g
ranularity at different Leiden resolutions, with the se lected embedding used for all subsequent
analyses. (J) Heatmap displaying the top 10 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) for each subclust er
in
 the UMAP embedding selected in (I). Scale, scaled expression scores. ( K to N ) RNA velocity
(VeloCyto) analys
is plotted on th e UMAP embedding, including pa rtition-based gr aph abstraction
(PAGA) analysis inferring differentiation trajectories from RNA splicing dynamics (K), endpoint cells
(L), 
latent time (M), and pseudotime (N). (O) Volcano plot of DEGs between GP1 and GP2 clusters of
murine growth plate chondrocytes. ( P) KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of DEGs from (O ),
highli
ghting pathways differentially regulated between GP1 and GP2.
=== PAGE 19 ===

=== PAGE 20 ===
Figure S6. Spatial characterization of murine GP1 and GP2 markers and lineage tracing of the 
GP1 cluster. 
(A to D) Representative confocal images showing co-detection of Sfrp5 and Cytl1 mRNAs in the resting 
zone of the murine growth plate, with individual channels for DAPI (blue, A), Sfrp5 (purple, B), Cytl1 
(white, C), and the merged image (D). mRNAs were  detected using RNAsco pe. Dashed white lines 
indicate the border between the growth plate and the secondary ossification center (SOC). Scales, 10 
m. (E) Feature plot showing that Prrx1 expression in murine growth plate chondrocytes localizes 
predominantly to the GP1 cluster. Scale, the number  of reads normalized to the sequencing depth. ( F 
to H) Quantification of Prrx1⁺ clones in the growth plates of Prrx1-CreERT2;R26-Confetti mice pulsed 
with tamoxifen at postnatal day 30 (P30). Number of recombined cells within the growth plate 3 days 
post-induction (F), presented as a percentage of all DAPI⁺ chondrocytes. n = 4 mice.  Number of clones 
(G) and
 number of cells per clone (H) at P33, P60, and P90. Data are presented as mean ± S.D., and
analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Tukey's post hoc multiple comparisons test. Dots, mice. n.s., not
significant. (I to M) Confocal immunofluorescence images of a Prrx1-derived clone (yellow) and th e
pr
e-osteoblast marker Osterix (OSX, red, immunodetected) showing a low-magnification overview of
a clone spanning from the secondary ossification center (SOC) to the primary spongiosa (PS) (I ) and
high-magnifi
cation images of selected areas (J–M) with representative double-positive cells marked by
red arrows. 
The YFP channel is shown in panels J and L, but omitted from the corresponding K and M
panels
 to facilitate assessment of  OSX co-localization. Nuclei counterstained with DAPI (blue). (N to
R) Co
nfocal immunofluorescence images of a Prrx1-derived clone (yellow) and the stromal cell marker
EBF3 (red, immunodetected) showing a low-magnification overview of a clone spanning from SOC to
PS (N) and high-magnification images of select ed regions (O–R) with double-positive cells (red
arrows). The YFP channel is show n in panels O and Q, but omitted from the corres ponding P and R
panels to facilitate assessment of  EBF3 co-localization. The phot omultiplier tube (PMT) channel was
re
corded for orientation. Scales, 80 m (I), 10 m (J, K, L, M), 200 m (N), 20 m (O, P, Q, R).
=== PAGE 21 ===

=== PAGE 22 ===
Figure S7. Predicted ligand-receptor interactions between different clusters within the human 
growth plate. 
(A and B) Bubble plots showing the top 60 predicted lig and-receptor pairs across clusters, ranked by 
specificity (A) and magnitude (B). Clusters GP3 and GP4 do not include predicted interactions among 
the top 60 ligand-receptor pairs based on specificity and, therefore, not shown in A. Bubble size 
represents the specificity of the interaction, and bubble color indicates the computed strength of the 
interaction. Arrows indicate clus ter-separated ligand-rece ptor pairs within th e following signaling 
pathways: Hedgehog (blue), BMP/TGF β (orange), Wnt (red), FGF (green), Ephrin (brown), PDGF 
(violet), and Notch (yellow). (C) Heatmaps showing RNA expression of selected ligand-receptor pairs 
across chondrocyte subsets, without scaling within genes, and the heatmap is divided into four sections 
according to the relative expression scale for visualization purposes. Scales, mean reads normalized to 
the sequencing depth.  
=== PAGE 23 ===

=== PAGE 24 ===
Figure S8. Additional characterization of the human growth plate explants treated with GH for 
2 months. 
(A and B) Tile-scanned sections of adolescent human growth plate explants cultured for two months 
with vehicle (A) or growth hormone (GH) (B). Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining shows no 
macroscopic morphological abnormalities in either group. ( C) Quantification of gr owth plate height, 
measured from the secondary ossification center (SOC) to the primary spongiosa (PS), in vehicle- and 
GH-treated explants,  n = 5 patients per group. (D to O) High-magnification histological images of the 
indicated growth plate zones from sections stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (D to I) or Safranin 
O/Fast Green (J to O). Images represent vehicle-treated explants (D to F, J to L) and GH-treated explants 
(G to I, M to O), and show no microsco pic morphological abnormalities. Scales, 100 m (D to I) and 
50 m (J to O). ( P and Q) Immunofluorescence staining of SOX9 (red) and quantification of SOX9 ⁺ 
nuclei in each growth plate zone. Dots represent in dividual patients (n=3-4). Insets highlight nuclear 
localization, consistent with  SOX9 function. Scales, 50 m. (R and S) Immunofluorescence staining 
of LARS2 (red) and quantification of LARS2⁺ cells in vehicle- and GH-treated explants. Dots represent 
individual patients (n=3). Insets highlight the subcellular localization ch aracteristic of this 
mitochondrial protein. Scales, 100 m. SOC, secondary ossification center; RZ, resting zone; PZ, 
proliferative zone; HZ, hypertrophic zone; PS, primary spongiosa. White or black double arrows labeled 
R and H indicate the longitudinal orientation relative to the resting (R) and hypertrophic (H) zones. 
Data are presented as mean ± S.D., dots represent in dividual participants. Analysis is done by paired 
Student’s t-test for panel (C) and by one-way ANOVA with Tukey's post hoc multiple comparisons test 
in (Q) and (S).  
=== PAGE 25 ===

=== PAGE 26 ===
Figure S9. Additional characterization of the human growth plate explants treated with GH for 
24 hours. 
(A to F) Immunofluorescence staining of CYTL1 protein (green, A, B) or RAMP3 protein (red, D, E) 
in vehicle (A, D) and GH-treated (B, E)  human growth plate samples, and quantification of CYTL1 ⁺ 
(C) a
nd RAMP3⁺  (F) cells in the resting zone of vehicle-treated (pink) and GH-treated (green) samples.
Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue). (G to I) Co-staining for CYTL1 and RAMP3 in vehicle-
treated samples shown at low (G), medium (H), and high (I) magnification. In (I), individual channels
and their combination are shown. (J to O) Immunofluorescence staining of Cyclin D1 (red, J, K)  and
MEF2C (red, M, N) in vehicle (J, M) and GH-treated  (K, N)  human samples, and quantification of
Cyclin D1⁺ (L) and MEF2C (O) cells in vehicle-treated (pink) and GH-treated (green) explants. Scale
bars 200  m (A, B, D, E, G, J, K, M, N), 80  m (H) and 15 m (I). PS, primary spongiosa. Wh ite
dashed lines
 mark the border of the slices. White  double arrows labeled R and H indicate longitudina l
orientation relative to 
the resting (R) and hypertrophic (H) zones. Data in C, F, L, and O are presented
as mean ± S.D., and dots represent individual partic ipants (n=3). Statistical  analysis was performed
using an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test. n.s.  - not significant.
=== PAGE 27 ===

=== PAGE 28 ===
Fig
ure S10. Molecular characterization of short-term cultured slices of the human growth plate. 
(A and B) UMAP clustering of uncultured human growth plate chondrocytes, reproduced from Fig. 1E 
(A), and chondrocytes obtained from growth plate explants cultured for 24 hours (B), for direct 
comparison of cellu lar distributions. ( C and D) Feature plots showing tota l RNA counts in explant 
cultures (C) and biological replicates color-coded for visualization (D). ( E to J ) Feature plots 
illustrating mRNA expression of SFRP5 (E), MKI67 (F), IHH (G), PTHLH (H), CYTL1 (I), and IGF1 
(J) in explant cultures. Scales, reads normalized to total counts. ( K) Bar graph comparing the relative
pe
rcentage of cells in S phase (blue) and G2M phase (orange) between naïve (uncultured) and short-
term cultured chondrocyte s, shown in (B). ( L) Representative H&E-stained image of sections from
short-term cultured explants, showing preserved cell morphology. (M) scANVI embedding combining
k
nown clusters from uncultured chondrocytes (color-coded GP1-GP5) with cells from cultured explants
(unknown, brown), including both vehicle- and GH-treated samples. ( N to O ) scANVI-predicted
clusters for cultured explants (N),  treatment representation (O), an d biological replicates (P). ( Q to S)
Fe
ature plots showing mRNA expression of SFRP5 (Q), PTHLH (R), and IHH (S) in combined cultured
v
ehicle- and GH-treated samples. Scales, reads normalized to total counts. (T) Bar graph comparing the
re
lative percentage of cells in S phase (blue) and G2M phase (orange) in GP2 and GP3 clusters between
vehicle- and GH-treated slices shown in (N). (U) Volcano plot of differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
between vehicle- and GH-treated samples in human GP3 proliferating growth plate chondrocytes. ( V)
KE
GG pathway enrichment analysis of DEGs identif ied in (U), highlighting pathways altered by  GH
treatment within the GP3 cluster. Statistical anal y
sis in K and T was calculated using the ch i2
co
ntingency test; **** p<0.0001
=== PAGE 29 ===

=== PAGE 30 ===

=== PAGE 31 ===
Table S2 (continues) 

=== PAGE 32 ===
Table S2 (continues) 

=== PAGE 33 ===
Data File S1
 – Differentially expressed genes (DEGs), arranged along differentiation 
trajectory. 
Data File S2 – Identified active transcription factors (TFs), arranged along differentiation 
trajectory 
Data File S3 – The same active TFs, but with activity presented on UMAP 
Data File S4 – Top 160 ligand-receptor pairs identified based on specificity (top panel) or 
magnitude (bottom panel) 
Data File S5 – DEGs identified between mouse GP1 and GP2 clusters. 
Data File S6 – Regulons, identified in cultured human growth plate slices treated with growth 
hormone for 24 hours.  
Data File S7 – Data utilized in graph bars reported in tabular format. 